"I mean,it doesn't seem particularly safe here and it looks as if it won't bemuch fun either. And when each person had got his(or her) cup of tea, each person shoved back his (or her) stool so asto be able to lean against the wall and gave a long sigh of contentment."And now," said Mr. Beaver pushing away his empty beer mug and pullinghis cup of tea towards him, "if you'll just wait till I've got my pipelit up and going nicely--why, now we can get to business. "It was just after breakfast when I wentinto the wardrobe, and I've been away for hours and hours, and had tea,and all sorts of things have happened.""Don't be silly, Lucy," said Susan. But we mustbe off at once. What a lot we shallhave to tell them! And what wonderful adventures we shall have nowthat we're all in it together."CHAPTER V_Back on This Side of the Door_Because the game of hide-and-seek was still going on, it took Edmundand Lucy some time to find the others. Beaver," said Susan. And even now, as they worked about hisface putting on the muzzle, one bite from his jaws would have cost twoor three of them their hands. "How beastly!There are horrid little mice crawling over him. Mrs. And then, just as they came to the lastcurve in a narrow, winding valley, Lucy heard above all these noisesanother noise--a different one, which gave her a queer feeling inside.It was a noise of shouts and shrieks and of the clashing of metalagainst metal.Then they came out of the narrow valley and at once she saw the reason.There stood Peter and Edmund and all the rest of Aslan's army fightingdesperately against the crowd of horrible creatures whom she had seenlast night; only now, in the daylight, they looked even stranger andmore evil and more deformed. Where did you get all these things?""Please, your Majesty," said the Fox, "we were given them. Look lively and sortyourselves."And with a great deal of bustle and cheering they did. Go quickly. "What'syour name?""Giant Rumblebuffin if it please your honour," said the Giant, oncemore touching his cap."Well then, Giant Rumblebuffin," said Aslan, "just let us out of this,will you?""Certainly, your honour. And nowhis hind legs had come to life. "She has kept me out for a long time,but I have got in at last. "Do you know anything about her?""She isn't a real queen at all," answered Lucy, "she's a horriblewitch, the White Witch. Here you must stop. It was like a bugle, but richer."It is your sister's horn," said Aslan to Peter in a low voice; so lowas to be almost a purr, if it is not disrespectful to think of a lionpurring.For a moment Peter did not understand. The Dwarf went away and presently returnedbringing an iron bowl with some water in it and an iron plate with ahunk of dry bread on it. What's that? Then, just beforeshe gave the blow, she stooped down and said in a quivering voice,"And now, who has won? "Edmund! Edmund!" they called till they were hoarse. But she could not feel it."This must be a simply enormous wardrobe!" thought Lucy, going stillfurther in and pushing the soft folds of the coats aside to make roomfor her. Fauns willsay anything, you know, and now--""Please, please," said Edmund suddenly, "please couldn't I have justone piece of Turkish Delight to eat on the way home?""No, no," said the Queen with a laugh, "you must wait till next time."While she spoke, she signalled to the Dwarf to drive on, but as thesledge swept away out of sight, the Queen waved to Edmund calling out,"Next time! Next time! Don't forget. In the meantime we will not dispute about noises. No one could say you had bagged a coat as long as youleave it in the wardrobe where you found it. Hesneered and jeered at Lucy and kept on asking her if she'd found anyother new countries in other cupboards all over the house. "I can always get back if anything goeswrong," thought Lucy. And forthe next half hour they were busy--she attending to the wounded whilehe restored those who had been turned into stone. "But we can't get there before herwhatever we do, for she'll be on a sledge and we'll be walking.""Then--have we no hope?" said Susan."Now don't you get fussing, there's a dear," said Mrs. He also noticed that he was unexpectedly cold; and then he sawa light."Thank goodness," said Edmund, "the door must have swung open of itsown accord." He forgot all about Lucy and went towards the light whichhe thought was the open door of the wardrobe. He crossed the riveron the ice and walked up to the house. The others whothought she was telling a lie, and a silly lie too, made her veryunhappy. And where thewater had been trickling over and spurting through the dam there wasnow a glittering wall of icicles, as if the side of the dam had beencovered all over with flowers and wreaths and festoons of the purestsugar. "Ha! You shall know usbetter hereafter. Then, holding out her arm,she let one drop fall from it on to the snow beside the sledge. It's she thatmakes it always winter. There also seemed to be far more of them.Aslan's army--which had their backs to her--looked terribly few. Hours and hours seemed to go by in this dead calm,and they hardly noticed that they were getting colder and colder. No. You must go backto your own country now and come to me another day, _with them_, youunderstand. The warmth ofhis breath and a rich sort of smell that seemed to hang about his haircame all over her."Do I look it?" he said."Oh, you're real, you're real! Oh, Aslan!" cried Lucy and both girlsflung themselves upon him and covered him with kisses."But what does it all mean?" asked Susan when they were somewhat calmer."It means," said Aslan, "that though the Witch knew the Deep Magic,there is a magic deeper still which she did not know. The next thing that Lucyknew was that Peter and Aslan were shaking hands. Ina few minutes he had called another wolf and was with him down on thedam and sniffing at the Beavers' house. "I am sure you wouldlike it. I'm to leadyou where you shall meet him," said Mr. Beaver."Is--is he a man?" asked Lucy."Aslan a man!" said Mr. Beaver sternly. Come and help to carry the tray down and we'llhave breakfast. In one corner there was adoor which Lucy thought must lead to Mr. Tumnus' bedroom, and on onewall was a shelf full of books. Heknows the Deep Magic better than that. And when they had reached themiddle they were at the door of the house."Here we are, Mrs. It is summer there.""Meanwhile," said Mr. Tumnus, "it is winter in Narnia, and has been forever so long, and we shall both catch cold if we stand here talking inthe snow. And for a secondnothing seems to have happened; and then you notice a tiny streak offlame creeping along the edge of the newspaper. But she did not offer him anymore. I might have to be very angry with you if youcame alone.""I'll do my best," said Edmund."And, by the way," said the Queen, "you needn't tell them about me. Soon there were birds singing all over the place.It was quite definitely early morning now, not late night."I'm so cold," said Lucy."So am I," said Susan. "Best keep down here as much as possible," hesaid. Let's," said Susan, "we might just as well be doing thatas lying awake here."Very quietly the two girls groped their way among the other sleepersand crept out of the tent. Thenoise of water grew louder. "How stupid of me! But I'venever seen a Son of Adam or a Daughter of Eve before. Edmund went up them. Up tothat moment Edmund had been feeling sick, and sulky, and annoyed withLucy for being right, but he hadn't made up his mind what to do. What's that? Is it more magic?""Yes!" said a great voice behind their backs. Now! Where's that dratted littleWitch that was running about on the ground. What did it matter?Nothing mattered now! But at last she saw that whatever-it-was hadbegun to move up the upright stones of the Stone Table. "Let's walk about a bit."They walked to the Eastern edge of the hill and looked down. One has only to look at her and talkto her to see that she is not mad.""But then," said Susan and stopped. "So _that's_ how you came to imagine yourself aQueen--because you were the Emperor's hangman. He stood there so long that his teeth wouldhave been chattering with cold even if they had not been chatteringwith fear. When at last she wasfree to come back to Edmund she found him standing on his feet and notonly healed of his wounds but looking better than she had seen himlook--oh, for ages; in fact ever since his first term at that horridschool which was where he had begun to go wrong. I'm sitting onsomething wet. He stepped out into the snow--but itwas really only slush by now--and began helping the Dwarf to get thesledge out of the muddy hole it had got into. Then signalling to the children to stand asclose around it as they possibly could, so that their faces wereactually tickled by its whiskers, it added in a low whisper--"They say Aslan is on the move--perhaps has already landed."And now a very curious thing happened. Susan felt as if some delicioussmell or some delightful strain of music had just floated by her. "Is that how you address a Queen?" she asked,looking sterner than ever."I beg your pardon, your Majesty, I didn't know," said Edmund."Not know the Queen of Narnia?" cried she. Edmund has seen it too. The hiltof the sword was of gold and it had a sheath and a sword belt andeverything it needed, and it was just the right size and weight forPeter to use. Let's go home.""Yes, let's," said Lucy. He merely took thehandkerchief and kept on using it, wringing it out with both handswhenever it got too wet to be any more use, so that presently Lucy wasstanding in a damp patch."Mr. Tumnus!" bawled Lucy in his ear, shaking him. Of courseI can't give you up to the Witch; not now that I know you. And after she had lain counting sheep and turningover and over she heard Lucy give a long sigh and turn over just besideher in the darkness."Can't you get to sleep either?" said Susan."No," said Lucy. And if you had watched long enough you would have seen thestump walk across to the boulder and the boulder sit up and begintalking to the stump; for in reality the stump and the boulder weresimply the Witch and the Dwarf. And she was called Queen Susan the Gentle.Edmund was a graver and quieter man than Peter, and great in counciland judgement. They began to drag thebound and muzzled Lion to the Stone Table, some pulling and somepushing. Straight ahead ofhim he saw between the tree trunks the sun, just rising, very red andclear. It looked veryold; and it was cut all over with strange lines and figures that mightbe the letters of an unknown language. "Ten to one it'll clear up in anhour or so. I beg your pardon, Missie, I thought you was the handkerchee!""No, no," said Lucy laughing, "here it is!" This time he managed toget it but it was only about the same size to him that a saccharinetablet would be to you, so that when she saw him solemnly rubbing it toand fro across his great red face, she said, "I'm afraid it's not muchuse to you, Mr. Rumblebuffin.""Not at all. I think I would like to make you the Prince--some day,when you bring the others to visit me.""Why not now?" said Edmund. Beaver,"but you've no chance of getting into that House against her will andever coming out alive.""Couldn't we have some stratagem?" said Peter. But I repeat--what are you?""Please, your Majesty," said Edmund, "I don't know what you mean. What's the matter with this place? As it was--though all this happened too quicklyfor Peter to think at all--he had just time to duck down and plunge hissword, as hard as he could, between the brute's forelegs into itsheart. And we will," said the two girls.Forward they went again and one of the girls walked on each side of theLion. And below the dam, muchlower down, was more ice, but instead of being smooth this was allfrozen into the foamy and wavy shapes in which the water had beenrushing along at the very moment when the frost came. Beaver?" exclaimed Susan."Packing a load for each of us, dearie," said Mrs. Instead of all that deadly white the courtyard was now ablaze of colours; glossy chestnut sides of centaurs, indigo horns ofunicorns, dazzling plumage of birds, reddy-brown of foxes, dogs, andsatyrs, yellow stockings and crimson hoods of dwarfs; and thebirch-girls in silver, and the beech-girls in fresh, transparent green,and the larch-girls in green so bright that it was almost yellow. Aslan is on the move. Edmund saw the Witch bite her lips so that a drop of bloodappeared on her white cheek. He at oncedecided to get into it himself--not because he thought it aparticularly good place to hide but because he wanted to go on teasingher about her imaginary country. Butat last Lucy noticed two other things. It was strange toher to see Peter looking as he looked now--his face was so pale andstern and he seemed so much older."It was all Edmund's doing, Aslan," Peter was saying. As for what the Witch would dowith the others, he didn't want her to be particularly nice tothem--certainly not to put them on the same level as himself--but hemanaged to believe, or to pretend he believed, that she wouldn't doanything very bad to them, "Because," he said to himself, "all thesepeople who say nasty things about her are her enemies and probably halfof it isn't true. _Us lions_. Oh, do come quick."A moment later Lucy and the little Faun were holding one another byboth hands and dancing round and round for joy. Call out thegiants and the werewolves and the spirits of those trees who are on ourside. "I think--I don't know--but I think I could bebrave enough.""That is not the point," he said. You may or may not be ableto cut her off and prevent her from reaching it." He then went on tooutline two plans of battle--one for fighting the Witch and her peoplein the wood and another for assaulting her castle. "But what does she pay you for?""That's the worst of it," said Mr. Tumnus with a deep groan. Where will you take us, Lu?""What about going to see Mr. Tumnus?" said Lucy. And she drives about on a sledge, drawn by a reindeer, withher wand in her hand and a crown on her head."Edmund was already feeling uncomfortable from having eaten too manysweets, and when he heard that the Lady he had made friends with was adangerous witch he felt even more uncomfortable. "I am sad and lonely. Well, just come andsee!"And then they were all at the top and did see.It _was_ a sledge, and it _was_ reindeer with bells on their harness.But they were far bigger than the Witch's reindeer, and they were notwhite but brown. "We can't sledge in thisthaw.""Then we must walk," said the Witch."We shall never overtake them walking," growled the dwarf. Her face was white--not merely pale, but white like snowor paper or icing sugar, except for her very red mouth. "Come on!" Andshe turned, pulling Susan round with her.The rising of the sun had made everything look so different--all thecolours and shadows were changed--that for a moment they didn't see theimportant thing. He kept slipping into deep drifts of snow, and skidding onfrozen puddles, and tripping over fallen tree-trunks, and sliding downsteep banks, and barking his shins against rocks, till he was wet andcold and bruised all over. But now that Aslan is on the move--""Oh, yes! Tell us about Aslan!" said several voices at once; for onceagain that strange feeling--like the first signs of spring, like goodnews, had come over them."Who is Aslan?" asked Susan."Aslan?" said Mr. Beaver, "Why don't you know? And the sledge wasnot running nearly as well as it had been running up till now. But if you had gone on lookingyou would gradually have begun to think there was something odd aboutboth the stump and the boulder. Go away, you littlebeasts." And she raised her hand to frighten them away."Wait!" said Lucy who had been looking at them more closely still."Can you see what they're doing?"Both girls bent down and stared."I do believe!" said Susan. (She had, of course, left the door open, for she knew that itis a very silly thing to shut oneself into a wardrobe.) It seemed tobe still daylight there. And then he found he was being untied.Strong arms were round him and he heard big, kind voices saying thingslike "Let him lie down--give him some wine--drink this--steadynow--you'll be all right in a minute."Then he heard the voices of people who were talking not to him but toone another. As soon asthey had breakfasted they all went out, and there they saw Aslan andEdmund walking together in the dewy grass, apart from the rest of thecourt. I was angry with him and I thinkthat helped him to go wrong."And Aslan said nothing either to excuse Peter or to blame him butmerely stood looking at him with his great golden eyes. "But supposing sheturns the two leopards into stone?" whispered Lucy to Peter. She's beenwatching for you this many a year, and if she knew there were four ofyou she'd be more dangerous still.""What's that to do with it?" asked Peter."Because of another prophecy," said Mr. Beaver. But there's never been any of your race here before.""That's what I don't understand, Mr. Beaver," said Peter, "I mean isn'tthe Witch herself human?""She'd like us to believe it," said Mr. Beaver, "and it's on that thatshe bases her claim to be Queen. On andon he led them, into dark shadows and out into pale moonlight, gettingtheir feet wet with the heavy dew. There's not a moment to lose."CHAPTER IX_In the Witch's House_And now of course you want to know what had happened to Edmund. He had a red woollen muffler round his neck andhis skin was rather reddish too. The moment the words were out of his mouth he realisedthat he had given himself away. He told about the midnight dancesand how the Nymphs who lived in the wells and the Dryads who lived inthe trees came out to dance with the Fauns; about long hunting partiesafter the milk-white Stag who could give you wishes if you caught him;about feasting and treasure-seeking with the wild Red Dwarfs in deepmines and caverns far beneath the forest floor; and then about summerwhen the woods were green and old Silenus on his fat donkey would cometo visit them, and sometimes Bacchus himself, and then the streamswould run with wine instead of water and the whole forest would giveitself up to jollification for weeks on end. "Certainly not. But Edmund had got past thinkingabout himself after all he'd been through and after the talk he'd hadthat morning. But he never moved. But be careful and don't slip."The top of the dam was wide enough to walk on, though not (for humans)a very nice place to walk because it was covered with ice, and thoughthe frozen pool was level with it on one side, there was a nasty dropto the lower river on the other. We simply must try to rescuehim.""A lot _we_ could do!" said Edmund, "when we haven't even got anythingto eat!""Shut up--you!" said Peter, who was still very angry with Edmund."What do you think, Susan?""I've a horrid feeling that Lu is right," said Susan. Then he saw Susan make a dash for a tree,and swing herself up, followed by a huge grey beast. It is no good coming without them.""But I don't even know the way back to my own country," pleaded Edmund."That's easy," answered the Queen. He'll put all to rights as itsays in an old rhyme in these parts:-- Wrong will be right, when Aslan comes in sight, At the sound of his roar, sorrows will be no more, When he bares his teeth, winter meets its death And when he shakes his mane, we shall have spring again.You'll understand when you see him.""But shall we see him?" asked Susan."Why, Daughter of Eve, that's what I brought you here for. While they were looking at this they hearda sound of music on their right; and turning in that direction they sawwhat they had come to see.Aslan stood in the centre of a crowd of creatures who had groupedthemselves around him in the shape of a half-moon. Once a King in Narnia,always a King in Narnia. "There's sure to be a rowif we're heard talking here.""No there won't," said Peter. "And who are you to saywhen I'm to go to bed? His face had become very red and his mouthand fingers were sticky. The moment that Edmund tells her that we're all here she'll setout to catch us this very night, and if he's been gone about half anhour, she'll be here in about another twenty minutes.""You're right, Mrs. Lay your hands on my mane sothat I can feel you are there and let us walk like that."And so the girls did what they would never have dared to do without hispermission but what they had longed to do ever since they first sawhim--buried their cold hands in the beautiful sea of fur and stroked itand, so doing, walked with him. "It's still there. The Beavers stoodholding each other's paws with their heads bowed. Some of the picturesof Father Christmas in our world make him look only funny and jolly.But now that the children actually stood looking at him they didn'tfind it quite like that. I hadn't known what Humans were like before I met you. "Andso you shall. He is in Narnia at this moment. It's the first bird I've seenhere. Keep your eyes open.Bless me, what _do_ they teach them at these schools?"And that is the very end of the adventures of the wardrobe. There were thecoats hanging up as usual, and a smell of mothballs, and darkness andsilence, and no sign of Lucy. Andthey themselves grew and changed as the years passed over them. "There's no one here butourselves.""There are the trees," said the Beaver. Then very slowly and with his heartbeating as if it would burst, Edmund ventured to go up to the lion.Even now he hardly dared to touch it, but at last he put out his hand,very quickly, and did. There it perched andlooked at them very hard as if it understood all they had been saying.Almost without noticing that they had done so, the four children went astep or two nearer to it. They gave you a curious feelingwhen you looked at them. Lucy looked at these while he wassetting out the tea things. Why shouldn't it be leading us into a trap?""That's a nasty idea. They waited nearly five minutes. They had titles like _The Life and Lettersof Silenus_ or _Nymphs and Their Ways_ or _Men, Monks and Gamekeepers;a Study in Popular Legend_ or _Is Man a Myth_?"Now, Daughter of Eve!" said the Faun.And really it was a wonderful tea. "This is goingto be perfectly splendid. "I had orders from the WhiteWitch that if ever I saw a Son of Adam or a Daughter of Eve in thewood, I was to catch them and hand them over to her. Let's get out into the open air."They all went out in the daylight and crowded round Peter as he readout the following words:--"The former occupant of these premises, the Faun Tumnus, is underarrest and awaiting his trial on a charge of High Treason against herImperial Majesty Jadis, Queen of Narnia, Chatelaine of Cair Paravel,Empress of the Lone Islands, etc., also of comforting her saidMajesty's enemies, harbouring spies and fraternising with Humans._Signed_ FENRIS ULF, Captain of the Secret Police,LONG LIVE THE QUEEN!"The children stared at each other."I don't know that I'm going to like this place after all," said Susan."Who is this Queen, Lu?" said Peter. I saw the tail.""It wants us to go to it," said Susan, "and it is warning us not tomake a noise.""I know," said Peter. He did not know what he would say, or how he would keep hissecret once they were all talking about Narnia.By this time they had walked a good way. It was a terrible time this--waiting and wonderingwhile the Lion and the Witch talked earnestly together in low voices.Lucy said, "Oh, Edmund!" and began to cry. Do come out. I think we'll haveto go on.""So do I," said both the girls."If only we knew where the poor chap was imprisoned!" said Peter.They were all still, wondering what to do next, when Lucy said, "Look!There's a robin, with such a red breast. She could have made itup with the others quite easily at any moment if she could have broughtherself to say that the whole thing was only a story made up for fun.But Lucy was a very truthful girl and she knew that she was really inthe right; and she could not bring herself to say this. And then asshe came fully awake she found that Mr. Beaver was just vanishing intoa little hole in the bank which had been almost hidden under the bushesuntil you were quite on top of it. And then imagine you are going about twice as fast as thefastest racehorse. There wereheavy darkish clouds overhead and it looked as if there might be moresnow before night."I say," began Edmund presently, "oughtn't we to be bearing a bit moreto the left, that is, if we are aiming for the lamp-post." He hadforgotten for the moment that he must pretend never to have been in thewood before. He's the King. But have you realised what we're doing?""What?" said Peter, lowering his voice to a whisper."We're following a guide we know nothing about. Then she recoveredherself and gave a wild, fierce laugh."The fool!" she cried. I say, Susan?""What?""I've a most horrible feeling--as if something were hanging over us.""Have you? A little way off at thefoot of a tree sat a merry party, a squirrel and his wife with theirchildren and two satyrs and a dwarf and an old dog-fox, all on stoolsround a table. He hadeaten his share of the dinner, but he hadn't really enjoyed it becausehe was thinking all the time about Turkish Delight--and there's nothingthat spoils the taste of good ordinary food half so much as the memoryof bad magic food. There werestone satyrs, and stone wolves, and bears and foxes and cat-a-mountainsof stone. Beaver. "Don't you see that theonly chance of saving either him or yourselves is to keep away fromher?""How do you mean?" said Lucy."Why all she wants is to get all four of you (she's thinking all thetime of those four thrones at Cair Paravel). What about just going home?""Oh, but we can't, we can't," said Lucy suddenly. It was then that hebegan very quietly to edge himself under the curtain which hung overthe door. How Aslan provided food forthem all I don't know; but somehow or other they found themselves allsitting down on the grass to a fine high tea at about eight o'clock.Next day they began marching Eastward down the side of the great river.And the next day after that, at about tea-time, they actually reachedthe mouth. But in general, take myadvice, when you meet anything that's going to be Human and isn't yet,or used to be Human once and isn't now, or ought to be Human and isn't,you keep your eyes on it and feel for your hatchet. If you or any ofyour friends are hurt, a few drops of this will restore you. Beaver. And so for a time it looked as if all theadventures were coming to an end; but that was not to be.This house of the Professor's--which even he knew so little about--wasso old and famous that people from all over England used to come andask permission to see over it. The Witch and the Dwarf were talking close besidehim in low tones."No," said the Dwarf, "it is no use now, O Queen. All four of them bundled inside it and sat there, panting,in the dark. And Aslan stood up and when he opened his mouth to roarhis face became so terrible that they did not dare to look at it. The sun was setting behind their backs. I promise.""Come, Lu," said Peter, "that's going a bit far. There are only three possibilities. What's that?" said Lucy."This is the land of Narnia," said the Faun, "where we are now; allthat lies between the lamp-post and the great castle of Cair Paravel onthe eastern sea. And Edmund stood in theshadow of the arch, afraid to go on and afraid to go back, with hisknees knocking together. When theDwarf had gone to get the sledge ready he expected that the Witch wouldstart being nice to him, as she had been at their last meeting. And nobody ever made thatsuggestion to him again.Edmund was on the other side of Aslan, looking all the time at Aslan'sface. It's getting wetter every minute." He struggled to hisfeet."Let's get out," said Edmund, "they've gone.""O-o-oh!" said Susan suddenly. And the woods? "Of course I've got to. After that he said nothing forquite a long time. Macready and threeservants. I know I've met a Faun in there and--I wish I'd stayed thereand you are all beasts, beasts."It was an unpleasant evening. "Meanwhile, stand still onthe threshold, as you value your life." Then it vanished into thehouse.Edmund stood and waited, his fingers aching with cold and his heartpounding in his chest, and presently the grey Wolf, Fenris Ulf, theChief of the Witch's Secret Police, came bounding back and said, "Comein! Come in! Fortunate favourite of the Queen--or else not sofortunate."And Edmund went in, taking great care not to tread on the Wolf's paws.He found himself in a long gloomy hall with many pillars, full, as thecourtyard had been, of statues. Overhead there was a pale blue sky, the sort ofsky one sees on a fine winter day in the morning. Close beside the path they werefollowing a bird suddenly chirped from the branch of a tree. I wonder could we takeit off?"So they tried. So he turned up his collar and shuffled acrossthe top of the dam (luckily it wasn't so slippery since the snow hadfallen) to the far side of the river.It was pretty bad when he reached the far side. Not at all," said the Giant politely. He did not talk very much and seemed to them to be sad.It was still afternoon when they came down to a place where the rivervalley had widened out and the river was broad and shallow. It wasthe sort of house that you never seem to come to the end of, and it wasfull of unexpected places. Tellyour mistress, Son of Earth, that I grant her safe conduct on conditionthat she leaves her wand behind her at that great oak."This was agreed to and two leopards went back with the Dwarf to seethat the conditions were properly carried out. Buthe made no noise, even when the enemies, straining and tugging, pulledthe cords so tight that they cut into his flesh. Once there were four children whose names were Peter, Susan, Edmund andLucy. Soon the beech trees had put forth theirdelicate, transparent leaves. A moment later she foundthat she was standing in the middle of a wood at night-time with snowunder her feet and snowflakes falling through the air.Lucy felt a little frightened, but she felt very inquisitive andexcited as well. Soonhe was wet to the skin. Peter saw to itthat Edmund stopped jeering at her, and neither she nor anyone elsefelt inclined to talk about the wardrobe at all. I'm in the pay of the White Witch.""The White Witch? Not thatwe don't need you too. Shehas made an enchantment over the whole country so that it is alwayswinter here and never Christmas.""I--I wonder if there's any point in going on," said Susan. And that's why theWitch is always on the lookout for any Humans in Narnia. No side, nostand-off-ishness. He now reached this and turned to follow it up. "As soon asshe has looked in here and finds we're gone she'll be off at top speed.""That she will," said Mrs. "Turn _him_ into stone? And they drove backthe fierce giants (quite a different sort from Giant Rumblebuffin) onthe North of Narnia when these ventured across the frontier. The two older ones were really beginning to think that Lucywas out of her mind. No face looked over the battlements and thegates were fast shut. What is the meaning of all this gluttony, thiswaste, this self indulgence? If only the floor of the cave had been a littlesmoother! Then Mrs. And it was all more lonely and hopeless and horrid thanI know how to describe."I wonder could we untie him as well?" said Susan presently. But there's no twoviews about things that look like Humans and aren't.""I've known good dwarfs," said Mrs. "As soon as she has finished her business in theseparts," he said, "the Witch and her crew will almost certainly fallback to her house and prepare for a siege. And when Peter haddone so he struck him with the flat of the blade and said, "Rise up,Sir Peter Fenris-Bane. What madeit worse was that these days ought to have been delightful. "It would be too awful for him. Then, just as he gave himself up for lost, sheappeared to change her mind."My poor child," she said in quite a different voice, "how cold youlook! Come and sit with me here on the sledge and I will put my mantlearound you and we will talk."Edmund did not like this arrangement at all but he dared not disobey;he stepped on to the sledge and sat at her feet, and she put a fold ofher fur mantle around him and tucked it well in."Perhaps something hot to drink?" said the Queen. When he had finished he madeher a little bow."Good evening, good evening," said the Faun. They stood in the passage talking about it inwhispers long after she had gone to bed.The result was that next morning they decided that they really would goand tell the whole thing to the Professor. "Perhaps I may keep thehandkerchief?""Rather!" said Lucy, and then ran towards the far-off patch of daylightas quickly as her legs would carry her. I'm doing it now, this very moment.""What do you mean?" cried Lucy, turning very white."You are the child," said Mr. Tumnus. As soon as Mr. Beaver said "There's no time to lose"everyone began bundling themselves into coats, except Mrs. AndPeter's tired army cheered, and the newcomers roared, and the enemysquealed and gibbered till the wood re-echoed with the din of thatonset.CHAPTER XVII_The Hunting of the White Stag_The battle was all over a few minutes after their arrival. The larches and birches were covered with green,the laburnums with gold. "Of course, now you put itthat way, I see. Say you have been lyingand you shall even now be forgiven."At that moment one of the young squirrels lost its head completely."He has--he has--he has!" it squeaked beating its little spoon on thetable. "A door.A door from the world of men! I have heard of such things. Macready was trying to catch them, or that somemagic in the house had come to life and was chasing them intoNarnia--they seemed to find themselves being followed everywhere, untilat last Susan said, "Oh bother those trippers! Here--let's get intothe Wardrobe Room till they've passed. And now thesnow was really melting in earnest and patches of green grass werebeginning to appear in every direction. He listenedand the sound came nearer and nearer and at last there swept into sighta sledge drawn by two reindeer.The reindeer were about the size of Shetland ponies and their hair wasso white that even the snow hardly looked white compared with them;their branching horns were gilded and shone like something on fire whenthe sunrise caught them. They all looked so strange standing there perfectlylifelike and also perfectly still, in the bright cold moonlight, thatit was eerie work crossing the courtyard. People who have not been in Narniasometimes think that a thing cannot be good and terrible at the sametime. It kept goingfrom tree to tree, always a few yards ahead of them but always so nearthat they could easily follow it. They are all at the Stone Table, with _him_. Andwhen you put this horn to your lips and blow it, then, wherever youare, I think help of some kind will come to you."Last of all he said, "Lucy, Eve's Daughter," and Lucy came forward. He would havegiven anything to meet the others at this moment--even Peter! The onlyway to comfort himself now was to try to believe that the whole thingwas a dream and that he might wake up at any moment. A strange, sweet, rustling,chattering noise--and yet not so strange, for he knew he'd heard itbefore--if only he could remember where! Then all at once he didremember. "Thebrutes, the brutes!" for now that the first shock was over the shornface of Aslan looked to her braver, and more beautiful, and morepatient than ever."Muzzle him!" said the Witch. Instantly the huge creature rose, with all the hair bristlingalong its back, opened a great, red mouth and said in a growling voice,"Who's there? "I'm sure you wouldn't do anything of the sort.""But I have," said the Faun."Well," said Lucy rather slowly (for she wanted to be truthful and yetnot to be too hard on him), "well, that was pretty bad. Butthe little valley down which it came was much steeper and rockier thanthe one he had just left and much overgrown with bushes, so that hecould not have managed it at all in the dark. Everything was perfectly still, as if he were the only livingcreature in that country. She stopped her workand got up as soon as the children came in."So you've come at last!" she said, holding out both her wrinkled oldpaws. But it'spretty poor sport standing here in the snow. As soon as they were inside she found herselfblinking in the light of a wood fire. Then they did. But when the wholeparty saw the sledge stopping and who was in it, all the gaiety wentout of their faces. And soon after that a very strangeperson stepped out from among the trees into the light of the lamp-post.He was only a little taller than Lucy herself and he carried over hishead an umbrella, white with snow. He was dressed in polar bear's fur and on his head he wore ared hood with a long gold tassel hanging down from its point; his hugebeard covered his knees and served him instead of a rug. If she can standon her two feet and look him in the face it'll be the most she can doand more than I expect of her. At the name of Aslan each one of the children felt something jumpin his inside. And it's getting colder every minute, and we'vebrought nothing to eat. She did not shut it properly becauseshe knew that it is very silly to shut oneself into a wardrobe, even ifit is not a magic one.Now the steps she had heard were those of Edmund; and he came into theroom just in time to see Lucy vanishing into the wardrobe. There--behind you. The Lion shook hismane and clapped his paws together ("Terrible paws," thought Lucy, "Ifhe didn't know how to velvet them!") and said:"Meanwhile, let the feast be prepared. Peter held the door closed but did not shut it; for, ofcourse, he remembered, as every sensible person does, that you shouldnever never shut yourself up in a wardrobe.CHAPTER VI_Into the Forest_"I wish the Macready would hurry up and take all these people away,"said Susan presently, "I'm getting horribly cramped.""And what a filthy smell of camphor!" said Edmund."I expect the pockets of these coats are full of it," said Susan, "tokeep away moths.""There's something sticking into my back," said Peter."And isn't it cold?" said Susan."Now that you mention it, it is cold," said Peter, "and hang it all,it's wet too. Andthe cloth on the table tho' very clean was very rough.Just as the frying pan was nicely hissing Peter and Mr. Beaver came inwith the fish which Mr. Beaver had already opened with his knife andcleaned out in the open air. So fine, so handy. He grinned in a repulsive manner as he setthem down the floor beside Edmund and said:"Turkish Delight for the little Prince. "Hi! You up there," he roared. "That's a very,very bad business. Everyone was at him now. "But it's time wewere out of this.""And don't you start fussing either, Mr. Beaver," said his wife."There. And thedagger is to defend yourself at great need. "Poor old Lu, hidingand nobody noticed! You'll have to hide longer than that if you wantpeople to start looking for you.""But I've been away for hours and hours," said Lucy.The others all stared at one another."Batty!" said Edmund tapping his head. "The sea!" In the verymiddle of this open hilltop was the Stone Table. "Welcome, Susan and Lucy,Daughters of Eve. At any other time they would have trembled with fear; but nowthe sadness and shame and horror of Aslan's death so filled their mindsthat they hardly thought of it.As soon as the wood was silent again Susan and Lucy crept out into theopen hill-top. And then--we would fall upon the three at Cair.""Yet it might be better," said the Dwarf, "to keep this one" (here hekicked Edmund) "for bargaining with.""Yes! And have him rescued," said the Witch scornfully."Then," said the Dwarf, "we had better do what we have to do at once.""I would like to have done it on the Stone Table itself," said theWitch. He did notlike the way she looked at him.The Lady frowned. Her handstrembled so much that she could hardly undo the stopper, but shemanaged it in the end and poured a few drops into her brother's mouth."There are other people wounded," said Aslan while she was stilllooking eagerly into Edmund's pale face and wondering if the cordialwould have any result."Yes, I know," said Lucy crossly. It is too late now.""But they aren't countries at all," said Lucy, almost laughing. At firstEdmund tried to remember that it is rude to speak with one's mouthfull, but soon he forgot about this and thought only of trying toshovel down as much Turkish Delight as he could, and the more he atethe more he wanted to eat, and he never asked himself why the Queenshould be so inquisitive. But immediately after that she was verywide awake indeed, and so was everyone else. But then suddenly one great houndpicked up the scent and gave a bay. But you must have courtiers and nobles. It was the sort of house that ismentioned in guide books and even in histories; and well it might be,for all manner of stories were told about it, some of them evenstranger than the one I am telling you now. There was nothing else in the room at allexcept a dead blue-bottle on the window-sill."Nothing there!" said Peter, and they all trooped out again--all exceptLucy. Fornever since we four were Kings and Queens in Narnia have we set ourhands to any high matter, as battles, quests, feats of arms, acts ofjustice, and the like, and then given over; but always what we havetaken in hand, the same we have achieved.""Sister," said Queen Lucy, "my royal brother speaks rightly. AndLucy got the feeling you have when you wake up in the morning andrealise that it is the beginning of the holidays or the beginning ofsummer."And what about Mr. Tumnus," said Lucy; "where is he?""S-s-s-sh," said the Beaver, "not here. 'Coursewe've got a hope. Somewhere just by my feetit was." But when everyone had shouted up to him to explain what hadreally happened, and when the Giant had put his hand to his ear and gotthem to repeat it all again so that at last he understood, then hebowed down till his head was no further off than the top of a haystackand touched his cap repeatedly to Aslan, beaming all over his honestugly face, (giants of any sort are now so rare in England and so fewgiants are good tempered that ten to one you have never seen a giantwhen his face is beaming. It almost looks asif it wanted to say something to us." Then she turned to the Robin andsaid, "Please, can you tell us where Tumnus the Faun has been takento?" As she said this she took a step towards the bird. Then to cheer himself up he took outfrom its case on the dresser a strange little flute that looked as ifit were made of straw and began to play. Be off quickly, Ihave a little thing to finish here while you are away."The great brute bowed its head, turned, and galloped away."Now!" said she, "we have no table--let me see. But if she could have looked alittle further back, into the stillness and the darkness before Timedawned, she would have read there a different incantation. It is all on my account that thepoor Faun has got into this trouble. "I think you area very good Faun. And on the sledge sat a person whom everyone knew themoment they set eyes on him. The two elder ones did this without meaning to do it, butEdmund could be spiteful, and on this occasion he was spiteful. Though it was bright sunshine everyone felt suddenlycold. In fact, by the time she realisedwhat was happening, only his short flat tail was showing.Lucy immediately stooped down and crawled in after him. It looked to thechildren, when the gleam of the torchlight fell on it, as if the knifewere made of stone not of steel and it was of a strange and evil shape.At last she drew near. The gates creaked at the first blow, cracked at the second, andshivered at the third. For it was part of her magic that shecould make things look like what they weren't, and she had the presenceof mind to do so at the very moment when the knife was knocked out ofher hand. Then she began to whet her knife. Beaver," said her husband. On theother hand, I don't think many girls of her age would invent that ideafor themselves. He had wonderfultales to tell of life in the forest. The Dwarf immediatelytook this and handed it to Edmund with a bow and a smile; not a verynice smile. But Mr. Beaver shook his head in a verygloomy fashion."I'm afraid it means they were taking him to her house," said Mr.Beaver."But what'll they do to him, Mr. Beaver?" gasped Lucy."Well," said Mr. Beaver, "you can't exactly say for sure. And there's another thing too.Has anyone the least idea of the way home from here?""Great Scott!" said Peter, "I hadn't thought of that.""And no chance of dinner either," said Edmund.CHAPTER VII_A Day with the Beavers_While the two boys were whispering behind, both the girls suddenlycried "Oh!" and stopped. I shall go to bed now. Andinstead of the deadly silence the whole place rang with the sound ofhappy roarings, brayings, yelpings, barkings, squealings, cooings,neighings, stampings, shouts, hurrahs, songs and laughter."Ooh!" said Susan in a different tone. I'm sure a robin wouldn't be on thewrong side.""If it comes to that, which _is_ the right side? And even when Lucy went over and put her arms round himand lent him her handkerchief, he did not stop. The sledge jerked, andskidded, and kept on jolting as if it had struck against stones. Isn'tthere something you can work against it?""Work against the Emperor's magic?" said Aslan turning to her withsomething like a frown on his face. Who is she?""Why, it is she that has got all Narnia under her thumb. Then at last, as they stoodfor a moment looking out towards the sea and Cair Paravel (which theycould now just make out) the red turned to gold along the line wherethe sea and the sky met and very slowly up came the edge of the sun.At that moment they heard from behind them a loud noise--a greatcracking, deafening noise as if a giant had broken a giant's plate."What's that?" said Lucy, clutching Susan's arm."I--I feel afraid to turn round," said Susan; "something awful ishappening.""They're doing something worse to _him_," said Lucy. She shut the wardrobe door tightlybehind her and looked around, panting for breath. The other was some tiny movement going on in the grass at herfeet. "That's all thebetter, because it means we shan't have any visitors; and if anyoneshould have been trying to follow you, why he won't find any tracks."CHAPTER VIII_What Happened after Dinner_"And now," said Lucy, "do please tell us what's happened to Mr. Tumnus.""Ah, that's bad," said Mr. Beaver shaking his head. Will you bring them to see me?""I'll try," said Edmund, still looking at the empty box."Because, if you did come again--bringing them with you of course--I'dbe able to give you some more Turkish Delight. There were no booksor pictures and instead of beds there were bunks, like on board ship,built into the wall. She got him to tell her that he had onebrother and two sisters, and that one of his sisters had already beenin Narnia and had met a Faun there, and that no one except himself andhis brother and his sisters knew anything about Narnia. "I mean, it's no good juststanding here and I feel I want some dinner."At this moment the Beaver again popped its head out from behind thetree and beckoned earnestly to them."Come on," said Peter, "let's give it a try. We can't get there _before_ her but we can keepunder cover and go by ways she won't expect and perhaps we'll getthrough.""That's true enough, Mrs. We might see him.""All right. No one will follow us inthere." But the moment they were inside they heard voices in thepassage--and then someone fumbling at the door--and then they saw thehandle turning."Quick!" said Peter, "there's nowhere else," and flung open thewardrobe. She was fighting with her stone knife. The two girls, breathless butunhurt, found themselves tumbling off his back in the middle of a widestone courtyard full of statues.CHAPTER XVI_What Happened about the Statues_"What an extraordinary place!" cried Lucy. They must havereached the Stone Table by now.""Perhaps the Wolf will smell us out and bring us news," said the Witch."It cannot be good news if he does," said the Dwarf."Four thrones in Cair Paravel," said the Witch. She did not mean to hide in the wardrobe,because she knew that would only set the others talking again about thewhole wretched business. They walked to and fro more times than they couldcount between the dead Aslan and the Eastern ridge, trying to keepwarm; and oh, how tired their legs felt. "I don't want togo a step further and I wish we'd never come. They hadn't even known for certain (as the Witch did) thatthis was what would happen when Aslan came to Narnia. She's caught him already and turned him into stone.So _that's_ the end of all their fine ideas about him! Pooh! Who'safraid of Aslan?"And he stood there gloating over the stone lion, and presently he didsomething very silly and childish. And presently instead of roughbranches brushing past her she felt coats, and instead of crunchingsnow under her feet she felt wooden boards, and all at once she foundherself jumping out of the wardrobe into the same empty room from whichthe whole adventure had started. Peterfelt suddenly brave and adventurous. _Us lions_. Fly! Fly!""No," said the Witch. He had no wife and he lived in avery large house with a housekeeper called Mrs. I suppose you canfind your own way from there back to Spare Oom and War Drobe?""I'm sure I can," said Lucy."We must go as quietly as we can," said Mr. Tumnus. And you are riding noton a road nor in a park nor even on the downs but right across Narnia,in spring, down solemn avenues of beech and across sunny glades of oak,through wild orchards of snow-white cherry trees, past roaringwaterfalls and mossy rocks and echoing caverns, up windy slopes alightwith gorse bushes and across the shoulders of heathery mountains andalong giddy ridges and down, down, down again into wild valleys and outinto acres of blue flowers.It was nearly mid-day when they found themselves looking down a steephillside at a castle--a little toy castle it looked from where theystood--which seemed to be all pointed towers. And then shesaw that there was a light ahead of her; not a few inches away wherethe back of the wardrobe ought to have been, but a long way off.Something cold and soft was falling on her. WhenPeter suddenly asked him the question he decided all at once to do themeanest and most spiteful thing he could think of. He looked somehow different fromthe Aslan they knew. He rushed straightup to the monster and aimed a slash of his sword at its side. There, shining in the sunrise, larger than they hadseen him before, shaking his mane (for it had apparently grown again)stood Aslan himself."Oh, Aslan!" cried both the children, staring up at him, almost as muchfrightened as they were glad."Aren't you dead then, dear Aslan?" said Lucy."Not now," said Aslan."You're not--not a--?" asked Susan in a shaky voice. I believe you did it simply out of spite.""But it's all nonsense," said Edmund, very taken aback."Of course it's all nonsense," said Peter, "that's just the point. It's all right! It isn't _her_!"This was bad grammar of course, but that is how beavers talk when theyare excited; I mean, in Narnia--in our world they usually don't talk atall.So Mrs. But the word has reached us that hehas come back. For the moment then and unless any further evidence turns up,we must assume that she is telling the truth."Susan looked at him very hard and was quite sure from the expression onhis face that he was not making fun of them."But how could it be true, Sir?" said Peter."Why do you say that?" asked the Professor."Well, for one thing," said Peter, "if it was real why doesn't everyonefind this country every time they go to the wardrobe? That's what she comes from on one side. That was how the adventures began for thesecond time.A few mornings later Peter and Edmund were looking at the suit ofarmour and wondering if they could take it to bits when the two girlsrushed into the room and said, "Look out! Here comes the Macready anda whole gang with her.""Sharp's the word," said Peter, and all four made off through the doorat the far end of the room. Wecan't just go home, not after this. And in the meantime we're pretty well off. Edmund nowventured a little nearer, still keeping in the shadow of the arch asmuch as he could. In fact here were all those whowere on the Witch's side and whom the Wolf had summoned at her command.And right in the middle, standing by the Table, was the Witch herself.A howl and a gibber of dismay went up from the creatures when theyfirst saw the great Lion pacing towards them, and for a moment theWitch herself seemed to be struck with fear. They had just finishedbreakfast with the Professor and were upstairs in the room he had setapart for them--a long, low room with two windows looking out in onedirection and two in another."Do stop grumbling, Ed," said Susan. "One day you'll see him and another you won't. I've been looking for youeverywhere.""If I'd known you had got in I'd have waited for you," said Lucy whowas too happy and excited to notice how snappishly Edmund spoke or howflushed and strange his face was. "When it springs at the dwarf thenwill be my chance to escape." But still the lion never moved, nor didthe dwarf. "She calls herselfthe Queen of Narnia though she has no right to be queen at all, and allthe Fauns and Dryads and Naiads and dwarfs and animals--at least allthe good ones--simply hate her. It was almostquite dark in there and she kept her arms stretched out in front of herso as not to bump her face into the back of the wardrobe. I will drop it in yourhouse as I pass.""If you please, sir," said Mrs. Aslan lookedmore like himself without them. There was nothing Lucy liked so much as the smell and feelof fur. It was like thatnow. And on the other shecomes of the giants. The horse part ofthem was like huge English farm horses, and the man part was like sternbut beautiful giants. And youdon't think you'll be able to use it while we're on the run, I suppose?""I can't abide the thought of that Witch fiddling with it," said Mrs.Beaver, "and breaking it or stealing it, as likely as not.""Oh, please, please, please, do hurry!" said the three children. "Bring the human creaturefood and drink," she said. I show it to you because you are thefirst-born and you will be High King over all the rest."And once more Peter said nothing, for at that moment a strange noisewoke the silence suddenly. How do we know whichside that bird is on? "Why don't they teachlogic at these schools? Susan had not been able to get higher than the second big branch.One of her legs hung down so that her foot was only an inch or twoabove the snapping teeth. She--she wanted to see them.""I will tell Her Majesty," said the Wolf. He has just dartedaway. And presently they saw that they weregoing with him up the slope of the hill on which the Stone Table stood.They went up at the side where the trees came furthest up, and whenthey got to the last tree (it was one that had some bushes about it)Aslan stopped and said,"Oh, children, children. 'Course he isn't safe. Beforethey had been going a quarter of an hour all the front of him wascovered with snow--he soon stopped trying to shake it off because, asquickly as he did that, a new lot gathered, and he was so tired. But in Narnia no one thinks any the worse of you for that."Quick! Quick!" shouted the voice of Aslan, "Centaurs! Eagles! I seeanother wolf in the thickets. For the mention of Aslan gave him a mysterious and horriblefeeling just as it gave the others a mysterious and lovely feeling.Just as Mr. Beaver had been repeating the rhyme about _Adam's flesh andAdam's bone_ Edmund had been very quietly turning the door handle; andjust before Mr. Beaver had begun telling them that the White Witchwasn't really human at all but half a Jinn and half a giantess, Edmundhad got outside into the snow and cautiously closed the door behind him.You mustn't think that even now Edmund was quite so bad that heactually wanted his brother and sisters to be turned into stone. Beaver, "butjust get half a dozen clean handkerchiefs out of that drawer. The house was really a small castle. On the sledge, driving the reindeer, sat a fatdwarf who would have been about three feet high if he had beenstanding. What's the matter with her? Thinkhow you'd feel if you were he.""All the same I think he ought to know," said Lucy. They could see the micenibbling away; dozens and dozens, even hundreds, of little field mice.And at last, one by one, the ropes were all gnawed through.The sky in the East was whitish by now and the stars were gettingfainter--all except one very big one low down on the Eastern horizon.They felt colder than they had been all night. A moment later he found thatthe monster lay dead and he had drawn his sword out of it and wasstraightening his back and rubbing the sweat off his face and out ofhis eyes. Once her wand wasbroken we began to have some chance--if we hadn't lost so many already.He was terribly wounded. Just below them a dam had been builtacross this river; and when they saw it everyone suddenly rememberedthat of course beavers are always making dams and felt quite sure thatMr. Beaver had made this one. "Do you mean you are a Son of Adam?"Edmund stood still, saying nothing. Then he turned from them and walked out onto the topof the hill. "No," he said, "I don't think itwill be any good trying to go back through the wardrobe door to get thecoats. Hegave her a little bottle of what looked like glass (but people saidafterwards that it was made of diamond) and a small dagger. If he'd been the other sort she'd never haveturned him into stone."At this point Aslan clapped his paws together and called for silence."Our day's work is not yet over," he said, "and if the Witch is to befinally defeated before bed-time we must find the battle at once.""And join in I hope, Sir!" added the largest of the centaurs."Of course," said Aslan. He was a huge man in a bright red robe(bright as holly-berries) with a hood that had fur inside it and agreat white beard that fell like a foamy waterfall over his chest.Everyone knew him because, though you see people of his sort only inNarnia, you see pictures of them and hear them talked about even in ourworld--the world on this side of the wardrobe door. That steadied him a bit.When all were ready (it was a big sheep-dog who actually helped Aslanmost in getting them sorted into their proper order) they set outthrough the gap in the castle wall. Beaver, "if there'sanyone who can appear before Aslan without their knees knocking,they're either braver than most or else just silly.""Then he isn't safe?" said Lucy."Safe?" said Mr. Beaver. And theyentered into friendship and alliance with countries beyond the sea andpaid them visits of state and received visits of state from them. The father squirrel stopped eating with his forkhalf-way to his mouth and one of the satyrs stopped with its forkactually in its mouth, and the baby squirrels squealed with terror."What is the meaning of this?" asked the Witch Queen. Beaver very coolly."You didn't think we'd set out on a journey with nothing to eat, didyou?""But we haven't time!" said Susan, buttoning the collar of her coat."She may be here any minute.""That's what I say," chimed in Mr. Beaver."Get along with you all," said his wife. "Wherefore by my council we shalllightly return to our horses and follow this White Stag no further.""Madam," said King Peter, "therein I pray thee to have me excused. "The fool has come. Long ago they had left the coats behindthem. Lucy proved a good leader. They were lost."What's it like?" said Lucy."It's--it's a kind of animal," said Susan; and then, "Look! Look!Quick! There it is."They all saw it this time, a whiskered furry face which had looked outat them from behind a tree. Everyone stopped; everyone stared athim. People she's turned--" (he paused and shuddered) "turnedinto stone.""But, Mr. Beaver," said Lucy, "can't we--I mean we _must_ do somethingto save him. "We've only just come out of thatroom a moment ago, and you were there then.""She's not being silly at all," said Peter, "she's just making up astory for fun, aren't you, Lu? And he led them a great pace overrough and smooth and through thick and thin, till the horses of all thecourtiers were tired out and only these four were still following. But how slowly he walked! And his great, royal head drooped sothat his nose nearly touched the grass. Beaver to dish up the trout,so that in a very few minutes everyone was drawing up stools (it wasall three-legged stools in the Beavers' house except for Mrs. This story is about something that happened to them when theywere sent away from London during the war because of the air-raids.They were sent to the house of an old Professor who lived in the heartof the country, ten miles from the nearest railway station and twomiles from the nearest post office. But how do we know? When he had firstgot on to the sledge he had been afraid that she might drive away withhim to some unknown place from which he would not be able to get back,but he had forgotten about that fear now."It is a lovely place, my house," said the Queen. We will fight. Oh, you'll _know_ all right. And it seemedto all of them that there was nothing to be said."Please--Aslan," said Lucy, "can anything be done to save Edmund?""All shall be done," said Aslan. He also had atail, but Lucy did not notice this at first because it was neatlycaught up over the arm that held the umbrella so as to keep it fromtrailing in the snow. Their harness was of scarlet leather andcovered with bells. Perhaps it has sometimeshappened to you in a dream that someone says something which you don'tunderstand but in the dream it feels as if it had some enormousmeaning--either a terrifying one which turns the whole dream into anightmare or else a lovely meaning too lovely to put into words, whichmakes the dream so beautiful that you remember it all your life and arealways wishing you could get into that dream again. Soon she went further in and found that there was asecond row of coats hanging up behind the first one. Whoever finds him must come back here at onceand--""Search parties, Son of Adam?" said Mr. Beaver; "what for?""Why, to look for Edmund of course!""There's no point in looking for him," said Mr. Beaver."What do you mean?" said Susan, "he can't be far away yet. He saidthat if anything happened to him I must meet you here and take you onto--" Here the Beaver's voice sank into silence and it gave one or twovery mysterious nods. It was also becoming foggy. "No. Shewill not make an attack to-night." And then he sighed deeply. "That is the proper place. Laughing, though she didn't know why, Lucy scrambled overit to reach him. "Did Inot tell you to bring the others with you?""Please, your Majesty," said Edmund, "I've done the best I can. The moonlight was bright and everything wasquite still except for the noise of the river chattering over thestones. There might be eagles.There might be stags. Yes, you may come, if you will promise tostop when I tell you, and after that leave me to go on alone.""Oh, thank you, thank you. For then, in theGreat Hall of Cair Paravel--that wonderful hall with the ivory roof andthe west door all hung with peacock's feathers and the eastern doorwhich opens right onto the sea, in the presence of all their friendsand to the sound of trumpets, Aslan solemnly crowned them and led themonto the four thrones amid deafening shouts of, "Long Live King Peter!Long Live Queen Susan! Long Live King Edmund! Long Live Queen Lucy!""Once a king or queen in Narnia, always a king or queen. What fun it will be."But Edmund secretly thought that it would not be as good fun for him asfor her. He was too confused by this timeto understand what the question meant."I see you are an idiot, whatever else you may be," said the Queen."Answer me, once and for all, or I shall lose my patience. "I wonder is that more moth-balls?" she thought, stooping downto feel it with her hands. The castle of Cair Paravel on its little hill towered upabove them; before them were the sands, with rocks and little pools ofsalt water, and sea weed, and the smell of the sea, and long miles ofbluish-green waves breaking forever and ever on the beach. And then, though nobody said it out loud,everyone suddenly realised the same fact that Edmund had whispered toPeter at the end of the last chapter. (You couldn't havefound a robin with a redder chest or a brighter eye.)"Do you know," said Lucy, "I really believe he means us to follow him.""I've an idea he does," said Susan, "what do you think, Peter?""Well, we might as well try it," answered Peter.The Robin appeared to understand the matter thoroughly. All keep close together.We ought to be a match for one beaver if it turns out to be an enemy."So the children all got close together and walked up to the tree and inbehind it, and there, sure enough, they found the Beaver; but it stilldrew back, saying to them in a hoarse throaty whisper, "Further in,come further in. Butthe silently falling snow seemed to muffle their voices and there wasnot even an echo in answer."How perfectly dreadful!" said Susan as they at last came back indespair. She was jolly nice to me, anyway, much nicer thanthey are. Come soon."Edmund was still staring after the sledge when he heard someone callinghis own name, and looking round he saw Lucy coming towards him fromanother part of the wood."Oh, Edmund!" she cried. But where onearth have you been all this time? I feel I am going toroar. There's nothing there really."Poor Lucy gave Edmund one look and rushed out of the room.Edmund, who was becoming a nastier person every minute, thought that hehad scored a great success, and went on at once to say, "There she goesagain. Can't we do something about the Deep Magic? But they allknew that it was her spells which had produced the endless winter; andtherefore they all knew when this magic spring began that something hadgone wrong, and badly wrong, with the Witch's schemes. "How if only threewere filled? Faster and faster they went as the scent becameeasier and easier to follow. But she did not seem to be using itnow. And by now they had even stopped saying to one another, "Look!There's a kingfisher!" or "I say, bluebells!" or "What was that lovelysmell?" or "Just listen to that thrush!" They walked on in silencedrinking it all in, passing through patches of warm sunlight into cool,green thickets and out again into wide mossy glades where tall elmsraised the leafy roof far overhead, and then into dense masses offlowering currant and among hawthorn bushes where the sweet smell wasalmost overpowering.They had been just as surprised as Edmund when they saw the wintervanishing and the whole wood passing in a few hours or so from Januaryto May. And in that silence Edmund could at lastlisten to the other noise properly. She couldn'tbring herself to say the word _ghost_.Aslan stooped his golden head and licked her forehead. Will youshake hands?""Of course," said Lucy, and did."And now," said Susan, "what do we do next?""Do?" said Peter, "why, go and explore the wood, of course.""Ugh!" said Susan, stamping her feet, "it's pretty cold. The first few doors they tried led onlyinto spare bedrooms, as everyone had expected that they would; but soonthey came to a very long room full of pictures and there they found asuit of armour; and after that was a room all hung with green, with aharp in one corner; and then came three steps down and five steps up,and then a kind of little upstairs hall and a door that led out onto abalcony, and then a whole series of rooms that led into each other andwere lined with books--most of them very old books and some bigger thana Bible in a church. And though he did not like to admit that he had been wrong, healso did not much like being alone in this strange, cold, quiet place;so he shouted again."I say, Lu! I'm sorry I didn't believe you. He'sthe Lord of the whole wood, but not often here, you understand. It would have been a dreadful thing for the Beavers and thechildren if the night had remained fine, for the wolves would then havebeen able to follow their trail--and ten to one would have overtakenthem before they had got to the cave. "Lucy! Lu! Where are you? Thatstroke never reached the Wolf. "Down at CairParavel--that's the castle on the sea coast down at the mouth of thisriver which ought to be the capital of the whole country if all was asit should be--down at Cair Paravel there are four thrones and it's asaying in Narnia time out of mind that when two Sons of Adam and twoDaughters of Eve sit in those four thrones, then it will be the end notonly of the White Witch's reign but of her life, and that is why we hadto be so cautious as we came along, for if she knew about you four,your lives wouldn't be worth a shake of my whiskers!"All the children had been attending so hard to what Mr. Beaver wastelling them that they had noticed nothing else for a long time. And then he had listened until Mr.Beaver told them about Aslan and until he had heard the wholearrangement for meeting Aslan at the Stone Table. Then they began todrag him towards the Stone Table."Stop!" said the Witch. Peter was silent and solemn as he received these giftsfor he felt they were a very serious kind of present."Susan, Eve's Daughter," said Father Christmas. She looked back over her shoulder and there, betweenthe dark tree-trunks, she could still see the open doorway of thewardrobe and even catch a glimpse of the empty room from which she hadset out. And there were hams and strings of onions hangingfrom the roof and against the walls were gum boots and oilskins andhatchets and pairs of shears and spades and trowels and things forcarrying mortar in and fishing rods and fishing nets and sacks. We're not safe in the open!" Onlywhen it had led them into a dark spot where four trees grew so closetogether that their boughs met and the brown earth and pine needlescould be seen underfoot because no snow had been able to fall there,did it begin to talk to them."Are you the Sons of Adam and the Daughters of Eve?" it said."We're some of them," said Peter."S-s-s-sh!" said the Beaver, "not so loud please. Those who had beenafraid to come near him even after he was bound began to find theircourage, and for a few minutes the two girls could not even see him--sothickly was he surrounded by the whole crowd of creatures kicking him,hitting him, spitting on him, jeering at him.At last the rabble had had enough of this. In that knowledge,despair and die."The children did not see the actual moment of the killing. Even some of the trees are on her side."They both got up and left the tea things on the table, and Mr. Tumnusonce more put up his umbrella and gave Lucy his arm, and they went outinto the snow. Then he saw that it looked like an Alsatian,though it was far too big to be a dog. You would be enjoying yourself so much that youwouldn't want the bother of going to fetch them. And shortly after that they looked into a roomthat was quite empty except for one big wardrobe; the sort that has alooking-glass in the door. It's a sight well worth looking at.)"Now for the inside of this house!" said Aslan. Aslan leaped again. Beaver said:"Now then, now then! Don't stand talking there till the tea's gotcold. Macready must be bringing her party ofsight-seers up the back stairs--instead of up the front stairs as theyhad expected. You feel as ifnothing was ever going to happen again. There is no need to tell you (and no one ever heard) what Aslanwas saying but it was a conversation which Edmund never forgot. I very much want to know your charmingrelations. And now look the other way"--here she pointedin the opposite direction--"and tell me if you can see two little hillsrising above the trees.""I think I can," said Edmund."Well my house is between those two hills. Then they recovered themselves and stoodchamping their bits and blowing. Then there was moretying and tightening of cords."The cowards! The cowards!" sobbed Susan. But it doesn't really matter." So theyproceeded to pitch their camp.Aslan's mood affected everyone that evening. Everyone was feeling very tired andvery hungry when suddenly the trees began to get thinner in front ofthem and the ground to fall steeply down hill. You must ride on me." And he croucheddown and the children climbed onto his warm, golden back and Susan satfirst holding on tightly to his mane and Lucy sat behind holding ontightly to Susan. Coming suddenly rounda corner into a glade of silver birch trees Edmund saw the groundcovered in all directions with little yellow flowers--celandines. The Witch bared herarms as she had bared them the previous night when it had been Edmundinstead of Aslan. "The robin!" cried Lucy, "the robin. But this is a mount that doesn't need to be guidedand never grows tired. She felt that the conversationwas beginning to get off the point."My dear young lady," said the Professor, suddenly looking up with avery sharp expression at both of them, "there is one plan which no onehas yet suggested and which is well worth trying.""What's that?" said Susan."We might all try minding our own business," said he. There was not even a robin or a squirrelamong the trees, and the wood stretched as far as he could see in everydirection. But instead of feeling the hard, smoothwood of the floor of the wardrobe, she felt something soft and powderyand extremely cold, "This is very queer," she said, and went on a stepor two further.Next moment she found that what was rubbing against her face and handswas no longer soft fur but something hard and rough and even prickly."Why, it is just like branches of trees!" exclaimed Lucy. I expect she is the rightful Queen really. That's better. Peter whistled."So you really were here," he said, "that time Lu said she'd met you inhere--and you made out she was telling lies."There was a dead silence. The shieldwas the colour of silver and across it there ramped a red lion, asbright as a ripe strawberry at the moment when you pick it. And after a lot of working at it (for their fingerswere cold and it was now the darkest part of the night) they succeeded.And when they saw his face without it they burst out crying again andkissed it and fondled it and wiped away the blood and the foam as wellas they could. "Tell us ofthis Deep Magic.""Tell you?" said the Witch, her voice growing suddenly shriller. Washe still here when I told you that the place for meeting Aslan was theStone Table?"And of course no one knew the answer to this question."Because, if he was," continued Mr. Beaver, "then she'll simply sledgedown in that direction and get between us and the Stone Table and catchus on our way down. I tell you heis the King of the wood and the son of the greatEmperor-Beyond-the-Sea. Who's there? But remember--you must bringthe others with you. Andwhen Lucy was tired of eating the Faun began to talk. The threechildren, who had not seen her before, felt shudders running down theirbacks at the sight of her face; and there were low growls among all theanimals present. He had become hisreal old self again and could look you in the face. Honestly it was. But at that momentthey were interrupted.That night they slept where they were. But inthe end all that foul brood was stamped out. You thought yourself mightyfine, didn't you?" But in spite of the scribbles on it the face of thegreat stone beast still looked so terrible, and sad, and noble, staringup in the moonlight that Edmund didn't really get any fun out ofjeering at it. And they were saying things like "Who's got the Witch?--Ithought you had her--I didn't see her after I knocked the knife out ofher hand--I was after the Dwarf--Do you mean to say she's escaped?--Achap can't mind everything at once--What's that? Tell you what is engraved on the sceptreof the Emperor-Beyond-the-Sea? The journey back was not at all like the journey to theFaun's cave; they stole along as quickly as they could, withoutspeaking a word, and Mr. Tumnus kept to the darkest places. The sky became bluer and bluer andnow there were white clouds hurrying across it from time to time. It'll happen whenyou're not looking for it. But when they had got out into the GreenRoom and beyond it, into the library, they suddenly heard voices aheadof them, and realised that Mrs. Will nottheir ranks turn into stone even as they come on? Beaver," said her husband, "we must all get awayfrom here. It had become arather alarming subject. And, whatever happens, never forget to wipeyour sword."CHAPTER XIII_Deep Magic from the Dawn of Time_Now we must go back to Edmund. Soon, wherever you looked, instead of white shapes yousaw the dark green of firs or the black prickly branches of bare oaksand beeches and elms. And as soon as he had thought of that he noticed thatthe lion's back and the top of its head were covered with snow. The moon was getting low and thin clouds were passingacross her, but still they could see the shape of the great Lion lyingdead in his bonds. And who will take him out ofmy hand _then_? Andhowever the Dwarf whipped the poor reindeer the sledge went slower andslower. "Well, of all the poisonous little beasts--"said Peter and shrugged his shoulders and said no more. "Not withthe start they've got.""Are you my councillor or my slave?" said the Witch. A bee buzzed across their path."This is no thaw," said the Dwarf, suddenly stopping. Lucy thought the Beavers had a very snug little homethough it was not at all like Mr. Tumnus's cave. Theyhave killed my captain, Fenris Ulf. He was quite warmnow, and very comfortable.While he was eating the Queen kept asking him questions. That's what I like about Aslan. It was still rainingand she could hear the voices of the others in the passage."I'm here," she shouted. Then said King Edmund,"I know not how it is, but this lamp on the post worketh upon mestrangely. So these two Kings and two Queens with theprincipal members of their court, rode a-hunting with horns and houndsin the Western Woods to follow the White Stag. And then something made Peter say:"That was partly my fault, Aslan. What'sthat?" Peter said it all over again."No," said Aslan in a dull voice, as if it didn't matter. _Us lions_. It's justgone behind that big tree.""What is it?" asked Lucy, trying very hard not to sound nervous."Whatever it is," said Peter, "it's dodging us. Every moment more and more of the trees shook off theirrobes of snow. Andso at last they all got outside and Mr. Beaver locked the door ("It'lldelay her a bit," he said) and they set off, all carrying their loadsover their shoulders.The snow had stopped and the moon had come out when they began theirjourney. And there on thefield of battle Aslan made him a Knight."Does he know," whispered Lucy to Susan, "what Aslan did for him? Anyway, she'llbe better than that awful Aslan!" At least, that was the excuse hemade in his own mind for what he was doing. And then too there was noroad. Snow had drifted in fromthe doorway and was heaped on the floor, mixed with something black,which turned out to be the charred sticks and ashes from the fire.Someone had apparently flung it about the room and then stamped it out.The crockery lay smashed on the floor and the picture of the Faun'sfather had been slashed into shreds with a knife."This is a pretty good wash-out," said Edmund, "not much good cominghere.""What's this?" said Peter, stooping down. Up to that momentLucy had been thinking how royal and strong and peaceful his facelooked; now it suddenly came into her head that he looked sad as well.But next minute that expression was quite gone. So--I don't know how to describe it.""What a nice giant he is!" said Lucy to Mr. Tumnus."Oh yes," replied the Faun. And beyond all this, miles away, was the sea, and beyondthe sea the sky, full of clouds which were just turning rose colourwith the reflection of the sunset. Then he cleared his throat and said the last thingeither of them expected."How do you know?" he asked, "that your sister's story is not true?""Oh, but--" began Susan, and then stopped. And if Imight make so bold as to drink your Majesty's very good health--""Who gave them to you?" said the Witch."F-F-F-Father Christmas," stammered the Fox."What?" roared the Witch, springing from the sledge and taking a fewstrides nearer to the terrified animals. Edmundfelt sure that she was going to do something dreadful but he seemedunable to move. Ofcourse it must be only a statue! No living animal would have letitself get covered with snow. "The question is are we to go to it or not?What do you think, Lu?""I think it's a nice beaver," said Lucy."Yes, but how do we _know_?" said Edmund."Shan't we have to risk it?" said Susan. What on earth are you crying about?""Oh--oh--oh!" sobbed Mr. Tumnus, "I'm crying because I'm such a badFaun.""I don't think you're a bad Faun at all," said Lucy. If not, then we may do very well, for shewon't know that Aslan has come to Narnia, or that we are meeting himand will be quite off her guard as far as _that_ is concerned.""I don't remember his being here when we were talking about Aslan--"began Peter, but Lucy interrupted him."Oh yes, he was," she said miserably; "don't you remember, it was hewho asked whether the Witch couldn't turn Aslan into stone too?""So he did, by Jove," said Peter, "just the sort of thing he would say,too!""Worse and worse," said Mr. Beaver, "and the next thing is this. The children all stood holdingtheir breaths.A moment later the stranger came out from behind the tree, glanced allround as if it were afraid someone was watching, said "Hush," madesigns to them to join it in the thicker bit of wood where it wasstanding, and then once more disappeared."I know what it is," said Peter, "it's a beaver. It was Peter she wasfighting--both of them going at it so hard that Lucy could hardly makeout what was happening; she only saw the stone knife and Peter's swordflashing so quickly that they looked like three knives and threeswords. Thewhole castle stood empty with every door and window open and the lightand the sweet spring air flooding in to all the dark and evil placeswhich needed them so badly. And this is whatthey saw.They were on a green open space from which you could look down on theforest spreading as far as one could see in every direction--exceptright ahead. She has renounced the claim on yourbrother's blood." And all over the hill there was a noise as ifeveryone had been holding his breath and had now begun breathing again,and then a murmur of talk. I say, let's go and explore to-morrow.You might find anything in a place like this. The Witch was-turning our troopsinto stone right and left. Then he realised. Let's go and find Lucy."It was not surprising that when they found Lucy, a good deal later,everyone could see that she had been crying. There was a nice brown egg, lightlyboiled, for each of them, and then sardines on toast, and then butteredtoast, and then toast with honey, and then a sugar-topped cake. She also was covered in white fur up to her throat and helda long straight golden wand in her right hand and wore a golden crownon her head. It'sflown away." And so it had--right out of sight."And now what are we to do?" said Edmund, giving Peter a look which wasas much as to say "What did I tell you?""Sh! Look!" said Susan."What?" said Peter."There's something moving among the trees--over there to the left."They all stared as hard as they could, and no one felt very comfortable."There it goes again," said Susan presently."I saw it that time too," said Peter. Once you were all fourinside her house her job would be done--and there'd be four new statuesin her collection before you'd had time to speak. Beaver, making a curtsey. Just bring them along to the two hills--a cleverboy like you will easily think of some excuse for doing that--and whenyou come to my house you could just say 'Let's see who lives here' orsomething like that. Beaver a little way back from thefighting line. "And I have such desire to find thesignification of this thing that I would not by my good will turn backfor the richest jewel in all Narnia and all the islands.""Then in the name of Aslan," said Queen Susan, "if ye will all have itso, let us go on and take the adventure that shall fall to us."So these Kings and Queens entered the thicket, and before they had gonea score of paces they all remembered that the thing they had seen wascalled a lamp-post, and before they had gone twenty more, they noticedthat they were making their way not through branches but through coats.And next moment they all came tumbling out of a wardrobe door into theempty room, and they were no longer Kings and Queens in their huntingarray but just Peter, Susan, Edmund and Lucy in their old clothes. The next thing he realised was that the daylight was almostgone, for it had been nearly three o'clock when they sat down to dinnerand the winter days were short. Macready and the visitors werestill talking in the passage; but luckily they never came into theempty room and so the children weren't caught.And that would have been the very end of the story if it hadn't beenthat they felt they really must explain to the Professor why four ofthe coats out of his wardrobe were missing. "You can all come back," he said."I have settled the matter. "Straight on, beyond that, is theway to the World of Men. Pull yourselvestogether," he advanced to the Lion and said:"We have come--Aslan.""Welcome, Peter, Son of Adam," said Aslan. Is he--quite safe? Then a tiny streak of gold began to run along his whitemarble back--then it spread--then the colour seemed to lick all overhim as the flame licks all over a bit of paper--then, while hishind-quarters were still obviously stone the lion shook his mane andall the heavy, stony folds rippled into living hair. "And now! Those who can't keep up--that is,children, dwarfs, and small animals--must ride on the backs of thosewho can--that is, lions, centaurs, unicorns, horses, giants and eagles.Those who are good with their noses must come in the front with uslions to smell out where the battle is. If your sister hasmet one of the Fauns, she may have heard strange stories aboutme--nasty stories that might make her afraid to come to me. He walked on and on, past corner after cornerof the house, and past turret after turret to find the door. And the Dwarf undid Edmund'scollar and folded back his shirt at the neck. Just like men. I must bring you where we canhave a real talk and also dinner."No one except Edmund felt any difficulty about trusting the Beaver nowand everyone, including Edmund, was very glad to hear the word"dinner." They therefore all hurried along behind their new friend wholed them at a surprisingly quick pace, and always in the thickest partsof the forest, for over an hour. She wouldhave known that when a willing victim who had committed no treacherywas killed in a traitor's stead, the Table would crack and Death itselfwould start working backwards. Butshe said nothing at all. "Look! I wonder--I mean, is itsafe?"Lucy looked and saw that Aslan had just breathed on the feet of thestone giant."It's all right!" shouted Aslan joyously. You never know where some poor prisoner may be concealed."And into the interior they all rushed and for several minutes the wholeof that dark, horrible, fusty old castle echoed with the opening ofwindows and with everyone's voices crying out at once "Don't forget thedungeons--Give us a hand with this door!--Here's another little windingstair--Oh! I say. "What would you like best to eat?""Turkish Delight, please, your Majesty," said Edmund.The Queen let another drop fall from her bottle on to the snow, andinstantly there appeared a round box, tied with green silk ribbon,which, when opened, turned out to contain several pounds of the bestTurkish Delight. Beaver. The skybegan to turn red. "She thinks I'm Susan come to catchher," said Edmund to himself, "and so she's keeping very quiet in atthe back." He jumped in and shut the door, forgetting what a veryfoolish thing this is to do. I am sure that would be best. And don't mention it to anyone else unless you find thatthey've had adventures of the same sort themselves. Bind him fast."Lucy and Susan held their breaths waiting for Aslan's roar and hisspring upon his enemies. I'll see you back to the lamp-post. He did not dare, even now, to mention the name of Aslan to hismistress."He may not stay long. He would never have done a thing like this.""A thing like what?" said Lucy."Like what I've done," said the Faun. Isuppose neither of you young ladies has such a thing as apocket-handkerchee about you?""Yes, I have," said Lucy standing on tip-toes and holding herhandkerchief up as far as she could reach."Thank you, Missie," said Giant Rumblebuffin stooping down. Beaverbrought unexpectedly out of the oven a great and gloriously stickymarmalade roll, steaming hot, and at the same time moved the kettle onto the fire, so that when they had finished the marmalade roll the teawas made and ready to be poured out. You are the nicest Faun I've ever met.""Oh--oh--you wouldn't say that if you knew," replied Mr. Tumnus betweenhis sobs. The Stone Table was broken into twopieces by a great crack that ran down it from end to end; and there wasno Aslan."Oh, oh, oh!" cried the two girls rushing back to the Table."Oh, it's _too_ bad," sobbed Lucy; "they might have left the bodyalone.""Who's done it?" cried Susan. I'd vote for going back and getting something from thelarder, only there doesn't seem to be any certainty of getting intothis country again when once you've got out of it. We don't really know anything abouteither.""The Faun saved Lucy.""He _said_ he did. Round andround the hill-top he led them, now hopelessly out of their reach, nowletting them almost catch his tail, now diving between them, nowtossing them in the air with his huge and beautifully velveted paws andcatching them again, and now stopping unexpectedly so that all three ofthem rolled over together in a happy laughing heap of fur and arms andlegs. And just asLucy was wondering whether she could really get to the top withoutanother long rest, suddenly they _were_ at the top. Lucy was miserable and Edmund wasbeginning to feel that his plan wasn't working as well as he hadexpected. But she's no Daughter of Eve. Anyway, they won't hear us.It's about ten minutes' walk from here down to that dining room, andany amount of stairs and passages in between.""What's that noise?" said Lucy suddenly. A light breeze sprang up whichscattered drops of moisture from the swaying branches and carried cool,delicious scents against the faces of the travellers. "It isn'tsomething I _have_ done. The only two people present who seemed to be quite at their easewere Aslan and the Witch herself. No, no. Mrs. Stand still, stranger, and tell me who youare.""If you please, Sir," said Edmund, trembling so that he could hardlyspeak, "my name is Edmund, and I'm the Son of Adam that Her Majesty metin the wood the other day and I've come to bring her the news that mybrother and sisters are now in Narnia--quite close, in the Beavers'house. It seemed so pitiful tothink of those little stone figures sitting there all the silent daysand all the dark nights, year after year, till the moss grew on themand at last even their faces crumbled away.Now they were steadily racing on again. Beaver, "that it is veryimportant to know just _when_ he slipped away. Have you ever had a gallop on a horse? "But I shan't be able tostay long.""If you will take my arm, Daughter of Eve," said Mr. Tumnus, "I shallbe able to hold the umbrella over both of us. There was no time lost after that.Soon all the dogs and lions and wolves and other hunting animals weregoing at full speed with their noses to the ground, and all the others,streaked out for about half a mile behind them, were following as fastas they could. Are youhuman?""Yes, your Majesty," said Edmund."And how, pray, did you come to enter my dominions?""Please, your Majesty, I came in through a wardrobe.""A wardrobe? Theycouldn't bear to look and had covered their eyes.CHAPTER XV_Deeper Magic from_ before _the Dawn of Time_While the two girls still crouched in the bushes with their hands overtheir faces, they heard the voice of the Witch calling out."Now! Follow me all and we will set about what remains of this war!It will not take us long to crush the human vermin and the traitors nowthat the great Fool, the great Cat, lies dead."At this moment the children were for a few seconds in very greatdanger. Without aword they both followed him.He led them up the steep slope out of the river valley and thenslightly to the left--apparently by the very same route which they hadused that afternoon in coming from the Hill of the Stone Table. Then he took Edmund'shair and pulled his head back so that he had to raise his chin. This maywreck all. He was covered with blood, his mouth was open, and hisface a nasty green colour."Quick, Lucy," said Aslan.And then, almost for the first time, Lucy remembered the preciouscordial that had been given her for a Christmas present. He felt a choking feeling and wondered if he ought to saysomething; but a moment later he felt that he was not expected to doanything except to wait, and do what he was told."Fall back, all of you," said Aslan, "and I will talk to the Witchalone."They all obeyed. I see.""Peace, Beaver," said Aslan, with a very low growl."And so," continued the Witch, "that human creature is mine. On each side the line stretchedout. Susan was"It" and as soon as the others scattered to hide, Lucy went to the roomwhere the wardrobe was. Have I not still my wand? Go on, Edmund; tell them allabout it.""What's all this about, Ed?" said Peter.And now we come to one of the nastiest things in this story. You've had your joke.Hadn't you better drop it now?"Lucy grew very red in the face and tried to say something, though shehardly knew what she was trying to say, and burst into tears.For the next few days she was very miserable. There's awireless and lots of books.""Not for me," said Peter, "I'm going to explore in the house."Everyone agreed to this and that was how the adventures began. "Now we shan't be long," he said, andimmediately put a kettle on.Lucy thought she had never been in a nicer place. You--you--said--" she answered, "Silence, fool!" Then sheappeared to change her mind and said, as if to herself, "And yet itwill not do to have the brat fainting on the way," and once moreclapped her hands. "He has not been here! Hecannot have been here! How dare you--but no. But he could not find the door either. That's what I am. Then came a sound even moredelicious than the sound of the water. "I mean couldn't wedress up as something, or pretend to be--oh, pedlars or anything--orwatch till she was gone out--or--oh, hang it all, there must be _some_way. The change was already creeping up the Giant's legs.Now he was moving his feet. Shafts of delicious sunlight struckdown onto the forest floor and overhead you could see a blue skybetween the tree-tops.Soon there were more wonderful things happening. "It's lockedup.""Locks and bolts make no difference to me," said Father Christmas."And as for you, Mr. Beaver, when you get home you will find your damfinished and mended and all the leaks stopped and a new sluice gatefitted."Mr. Beaver was so pleased that he opened his mouth very wide and thenfound he couldn't say anything at all."Peter, Adam's Son," said Father Christmas."Here, Sir," said Peter."These are your presents," was the answer, "and they are tools nottoys. Then the Dwarfset him with his back against a tree and bound him fast. AndPeter became a tall and deep chested man and a great warrior, and hewas called King Peter the Magnificent. "I tell you this is the sort of housewhere no one's going to mind what we do. Andthey shone in the moonlight and their long shadows looked strange onthe snow! Edmund began to be afraid of the house.But it was too late to think of turning back now. And whatever happens, donot let yourselves be seen. Aren't you well? That is howa soldier ought to think. The only light came from asingle lamp and close behind this sat the White Witch."I'm come, your Majesty," said Edmund rushing eagerly forward."How dare you come alone?" said the Witch in a terrible voice. Macready was not fond of children, and didnot like to be interrupted when she was telling visitors all the thingsshe knew. And Lucy and Susan, crouching in the bushes, looked afterhim and this is what they saw.A great crowd of people were standing all round the Stone Table andthough the moon was shining many of them carried torches which burnedwith evil-looking red flames and black smoke. "Quite batty.""What do you mean, Lu?" asked Peter."What I said," answered Lucy. I mean, therewas nothing there when we looked; even Lucy didn't pretend there was.""What has that to do with it?" said the Professor."Well, Sir, if things are real, they're there all the time.""Are they?" said the Professor; and Peter did not know quite what tosay."But there was no time," said Susan, "Lucy had had no time to have goneanywhere, even if there was such a place. That's the way.Now--off we go."And so Lucy found herself walking through the wood arm in arm with thisstrange creature as if they had known one another all their lives.They had not gone far before they came to a place where the groundbecame rough and there were rocks all about and little hills up andlittle hills down. "Poor fellow, he got wind of thearrest before it actually happened and handed this over to me. There were four great centaurs. "We'd have beenbeaten if it hadn't been for him. It wasall different a moment ago. It's myhandkerchief--the one I gave to poor Mr. Tumnus.""That's right," said the Beaver. But there a terrible surprise awaitedthem.The door had been wrenched off its hinges and broken to bits. Everyone felt how different ithad been last night or even that morning. That would not fulfil the prophecy.""What difference would that make now that _he_ is here?" said theDwarf. None of the children knew whoAslan was any more than you do; but the moment the Beaver had spokenthese words everyone felt quite different. Andthere were statues dotted all over the battlefield, so apparently theWitch had been using her wand. You may overtake these humans before they reach the StoneTable. Beaver and the children came bundling out of the cave, allblinking in the daylight, and with earth all over them, and lookingvery frowsty and unbrushed and uncombed and with the sleep in theireyes."Come on!" cried Mr. Beaver, who was almost dancing with delight."Come and see! This is a nasty knock for the Witch! It looks as ifher power was already crumbling.""What _do_ you mean, Mr. Beaver?" panted Peter as they all scrambled upthe steep bank of the valley together."Didn't I tell you," answered Mr. Beaver, "that she'd made it alwayswinter and never Christmas? Then others--evil dwarfs andapes--rushed in to help them and between them they rolled the huge Lionround on his back and tied all his four paws together, shouting andcheering as if they had done something brave, though, had the Lionchosen, one of those paws could have been the death of them all. There are whole rooms full of Turkish Delight, and what'smore, I have no children of my own. Drive on!" And Edmund for the first time in thisstory felt sorry for someone besides himself. But instead of findinghimself stepping out into the spare room he found himself stepping outfrom the shadow of some thick dark fir trees into an open place in themiddle of a wood.There was crisp, dry snow under his feet and more snow lying on thebranches of the trees. But just as she wasgetting near his face he suddenly started and then put her gently backon the ground muttering, "Bless me! I've picked up the little girlinstead. The silence and the loneliness weredreadful. "Do stop. He'll often drop in. "At last! To think that ever I should live to see this day!The potatoes are on boiling and the kettle's singing and I daresay, Mr.Beaver, you'll get us some fish.""That I will," said Mr. Beaver and he went out of the house (Peter wentwith him) and across the ice of the deep pool to where he had a littlehole in the ice which he kept open every day with his hatchet. That's ouronly chance now.""It seems to me, my dears," said Mrs. And then they looked ateach other and held each other's hands for mere loneliness and criedagain; and then again were silent. The snow was falling thickly andsteadily, the green ice of the pool had vanished under a thick whiteblanket, and from where the little house stood in the centre of the damyou could hardly see either bank. She came running after usthe very moment we were out of the room. Then, having caught sight of Aslan, he went bounding afterhim and frisking round him whimpering with delight and jumping up tolick his face.Of course the children's eyes turned to follow the lion; but the sightthey saw was so wonderful that they soon forgot about _him_.Everywhere the statues were coming to life. "It's down the river, a good stepfrom here. He was so big, and so glad, and so real, thatthey all became quite still. It wasanswered by the chuckle of another bird a little further off. This wasthe Fords of Beruna and Aslan gave orders to halt on this side of thewater. No, no, there isn't a drop of real Human blood inthe Witch.""That's why she's bad all through, Mr. Beaver," said Mrs. Then Susan suddenly caught Lucy's arm and said, "Look!" Onthe far side of the camping ground, just where the trees began, theysaw the Lion slowly walking away from them into the wood. It was the oddest thing to see thosetwo faces--the golden face and the dead-white face--so close together.Not that the Witch looked Aslan exactly in his eyes; Mrs. There was nowood and no snow, only the back of the wardrobe, with hooks on it.Peter went in and rapped his knuckles on it to make sure that it wassolid."A jolly good hoax, Lu," he said as he came out again, "you have reallytaken us in, I must admit. When they were closer he said,"Oh, children, children, why are you following me?""We couldn't sleep," said Lucy--and then felt sure that she need say nomore and that Aslan knew all they had been thinking."Please, may we come with you--wherever you're going?" said Susan."Well--" said Aslan and seemed to be thinking. What do you mean when you say there's no use lookingfor him?""The reason there's no use looking," said Mr. Beaver, "is that we knowalready where he's gone!" Everyone stared in amazement. That meant that thewhole country below them lay in the evening light--forest and hills andvalleys and, winding away like a silver snake, the lower part of thegreat river. He had togo right round to the far side before he found it. After that they didn'thurry so much and they allowed themselves more rests and longer ones.They were pretty tired by now of course; but not what I'd call bitterlytired--only slow and feeling very dreamy and quiet inside as one doeswhen one is coming to the end of a long day in the open. "I thought you were asleep. Bear it well,Sons of Adam! Bear it well, Daughters of Eve!" said Aslan.And through the Eastern door, which was wide open came the voices ofthe mermen and the mermaids swimming close to the castle steps andsinging in honour of their new Kings and Queens.So the children sat in their thrones and sceptres were put into theirhands and they gave rewards and honours to all their friends, to Tumnusthe Faun, and to the Beavers, and Giant Rumblebuffin, to the leopards,and the good centaurs and the good dwarfs, and to the lion. Then she heardnoises of scrambling and puffing and panting behind her and in a momentall five of them were inside."Wherever is this?" said Peter's voice, sounding tired and pale in thedarkness. They feltthe Spectres go by them like a cold wind and they felt the ground shakebeneath them under the galloping feet of the Minotaurs; and overheadthere went a flurry of foul wings and a blackness of vultures and giantbats. But he's good.He's the King, I tell you.""I'm longing to see him," said Peter, "even if I do feel frightenedwhen it comes to the point.""That's right, Son of Adam," said Mr. Beaver bringing his paw down onthe table with a crash that made all the cups and saucers rattle. "Are you a great overgrowndwarf that has cut off its beard.""No, your Majesty," said Edmund, "I never had a beard, I'm a boy.""A boy!" said she. Along this route Mr. Beaver led themin single file right out to the middle where they could look a long wayup the river and a long way down it. He was aFaun. And then at last the Witch said, "What have we here? Atfirst he thought this was because the reindeer were tired, but soon hesaw that that couldn't be the real reason. We're not safe evenhere.""Why, who are you afraid of?" said Peter. They looked like huge dunce's caps or sorcerer's caps. Behind them were coats hanging onpegs, in front of them were snow-covered trees.Peter turned at once to Lucy."I apologise for not believing you," he said, "I'm sorry. At this the Robin flew away again to thenext tree and once more looked at them very hard. The noise was like an English fox-hunt only betterbecause every now and then with the music of the hounds was mixed theroar of the other lion and sometimes the far deeper and more awful roarof Aslan himself. Afterthat Edmund heard a strange noise--whizz--whizz--whizz. All fullof statues they say it is--in the courtyard and up the stairs and inthe hall. It was as if the good times,having just begun, were already drawing to their end.This feeling affected Susan so much that she couldn't get to sleep whenshe went to bed. Then, when he saw all the othercreatures start forward and heard Aslan say with a wave of his paw,"Back! Let the Prince win his spurs," he did understand, and set offrunning as hard as he could to the pavilion. Welcome He-Beaver and She-Beaver."His voice was deep and rich and somehow took the fidgets out of them.They now felt glad and quiet and it didn't seem awkward to them tostand and say nothing."But where is the fourth?" asked Aslan."He has tried to betray them and joined the White Witch, O Aslan," saidMr. Beaver. You can think how good the new-caughtfish smelled while they were frying and how the hungry children longedfor them to be done and how very much hungrier still they had becomebefore Mrs. Andthey saw the stag enter into a thicket where their horses could notfollow. "Don't!Don't! What is the matter? And if someone will get two or threeloaves out of the crock over there in the corner.""What are you doing, Mrs. Inside,the cave was dark and cold and had the damp feel and smell of a placethat had not been lived in for several days. It was less than a minute,and she pretended to have been away for hours.""That is the very thing that makes her story so likely to be true,"said the Professor. The hags made a dart at him and shrieked with triumph when theyfound that he made no resistance at all. And nowwhatever-they-were were moving about on Aslan's body. Then he tackled the towers on each side of themand after a few minutes of crashing and thudding both the towers and agood bit of the wall on each side went thundering down in a mass ofhopeless rubble; and when the dust cleared it was odd, standing in thatdry, grim, stony yard, to see through the gap all the grass and wavingtrees and sparkling streams of the forest, and the blue hills beyondthat and beyond them the sky."Blowed if I ain't all in a muck sweat," said the Giant puffing likethe largest railway engine. Then he began feeling about for Lucy inthe dark. There is a newand better sewing machine for you, Mrs. And all the time hewas advising Peter how to conduct the operations, saying things like,"You must put your centaurs in such and such a place" or "You must postscouts to see that she doesn't do so-and-so," till at last Peter said,"But you will be there yourself, Aslan.""I can give you no promise of that," answered the Lion. Peter was feelinguncomfortable too at the idea of fighting the battle on his own; thenews that Aslan might not be there had come as a great shock to him.Supper that evening was a quiet meal. Then they heard somethingthat frightened them very much. His lifeis forfeit to me. And cut the harness of thereindeer; they'll find their own way home."The Dwarf obeyed, and in a few minutes Edmund found himself beingforced to walk as fast as he could with his hands tied behind him. And nextto Aslan stood two leopards of whom one carried his crown and the otherhis standard.But as for Aslan himself, the Beavers and the children didn't know whatto do or say when they saw him. It was a full moon and, shining on all that snow, itmade everything almost as bright as day--only the shadows were ratherconfusing.He would never have found his way if the moon hadn't come out by thetime he got to the other river--you remember he had seen (when theyfirst arrived at the Beavers') a smaller river flowing into the greatone lower down. And when they had finished the fish Mrs. That meanshim and me. But long before they hadfinished enjoying themselves Mr. Beaver said, "Time to be moving onnow."CHAPTER XI_Aslan Is Nearer_Edmund meanwhile had been having a most disappointing time. He drew his sword and raised it to thesalute and hastily saying to the others "Come on. Your winter has been destroyed, I tellyou! This is Aslan's doing.""If either of you mention that name again," said the Witch, "he shallinstantly be killed."CHAPTER XII_Peter's First Battle_While the Dwarf and the White Witch were saying this, miles away theBeaver and the children were walking on hour after hour into whatseemed a delicious dream. And now it no longer looked like a toy castle but rosefrowning in front of them. Now?" said Lucy jumping up and clapping her hands."Oh, children," said the Lion, "I feel my strength coming back to me.Oh, children, catch me if you can!" He stood for a second, his eyesvery bright, his limbs quivering, lashing himself with his tail. Everyone--all the wood people--hate her. But everyone became perfectly still in theend, so that you noticed even small sounds like a bumble bee flyingpast, or the birds in the forest down below them, or the wind rustlingthe leaves. And they both tumbled off.Then with a roar that shook all Narnia from the Western lamp-post tothe shores of the Eastern sea the great beast flung himself upon theWhite Witch. "It's--it's a magic wardrobe. Not very clever,perhaps (I never knew a giant that was) but an old family. I mean, whichis the more truthful?""That's just the funny thing about it, Sir," said Peter. Lucy wasrelieved when they reached the lamp-post again."Do you know your way from here, Daughter of Eve?" said Tumnus.Lucy looked very hard between the trees and could just see in thedistance a patch of light that looked like daylight. The trees beganto come fully alive. And I've pretended to be your friend and asked youto tea, and all the time I've been meaning to wait till you were asleepand then go and tell _her_.""Oh but you won't, Mr. Tumnus," said Lucy. Perhaps this was onlya stone lion. Now I will kill you instead of him as our pactwas and so the Deep Magic will be appeased. Then he did it all over again untilthey had a fine catch of fish.Meanwhile the girls were helping Mrs. But he hadn't time tolisten or watch any longer for the Witch said:"Don't sit staring, fool! Get out and help."And of course Edmund had to obey. Andthey saw all the trees in front of him bend before the blast of hisroaring as grass bends in a meadow before the wind. "Bind him, I say!" repeated the WhiteWitch. "All names will soon be restored to theirproper owners. Edmund couldn't quite see what they were eating, but itsmelled lovely and there seemed to be decorations of holly and hewasn't at all sure that he didn't see something like a plum pudding.At the moment when the sledge stopped, the Fox, who was obviously theoldest person present, had just risen to its feet, holding a glass inits right paw as if it was going to say something. Instead, she said to him,"Son of Adam, I should so much like to see your brother and your twosisters. It was a far larger housethan she had ever been in before and the thought of all those longpassages and rows of doors leading into empty rooms was beginning tomake her feel a little creepy."It's only a bird, silly," said Edmund."It's an owl," said Peter. "It'sonly just back there--at least--I'm not sure. But just where the land of Narniamet the sea--in fact, at the mouth of the great river--there wassomething on a little hill, shining. And you--you have come from the wild woods of thewest?""I--I got in through the wardrobe in the spare room," said Lucy."Ah!" said Mr. Tumnus in a rather melancholy voice, "if only I hadworked harder at geography when I was a little Faun, I should no doubtknow all about those strange countries. He was called King Edmund the Just. It's snowingagain," he added, cocking his eye at the window. I only meant to stay for a few minutes.""It's no good _now_, you know," said the Faun, laying down his fluteand shaking his head at her very sorrowfully."No good?" said Lucy, jumping up and feeling rather frightened. In the frosty air the breath comingout of their nostrils looked like smoke."And what, pray, are you?" said the Lady, looking hard at Edmund."I'm--I'm--my name's Edmund," said Edmund rather awkwardly. This Faun saved my sister at his own risk, Mr. Beaver. It was a little,dry, clean cave of reddish stone with a carpet on the floor and twolittle chairs ("one for me and one for a friend," said Mr. Tumnus) anda table and a dresser and a mantelpiece over the fire and above that apicture of an old Faun with a grey beard. Can't you tell us?""Are you ill, dear Aslan?" asked Susan."No," said Aslan. She and Peter felt prettyshaky when they met and I won't say there wasn't kissing and crying onboth sides. She had said to Susan and Peter almost on the first morning(along with a good many other instructions) "And please remember you'reto keep out of the way whenever I'm taking a party over the house.""Just as if any of us would want to waste half the morning trailinground with a crowd of strange grown-ups!" said Edmund, and the otherthree thought the same. And the moon was shining brighterthan ever. And there he saw adreadful sight.The Naiads and Dryads were scattering in every direction. I'vebrought them quite close. She had never dreamed that agrown-up would talk like the Professor and didn't know what to think."Logic!" said the Professor half to himself. I'mat school--at least I was--it's the holidays now."CHAPTER IV_Turkish Delight_"But what are you?" said the Queen again. Then came a horrible, confused moment like something in anightmare. He decided to letLucy down."Tell us, Ed," said Susan.And Edmund gave a very superior look as if he were far older than Lucy(there was really only a year's difference) and then a little sniggerand said, "Oh, yes, Lucy and I have been playing--pretending that allher story about a country in the wardrobe is true. I see now you were rightall along. It didn't seem tomatter what the Witch said."Well," said Aslan. Beaver."So've I, now you come to speak of it," said her husband, "but preciousfew, and they were the ones least like men. It was a sound ofjingling bells.Mr. Beaver was out of the cave like a flash the moment he heard it.Perhaps you think, as Lucy thought for a moment, that this was a verysilly thing for him to do? She immediately stepped into the wardrobe and got in among thecoats and rubbed her face against them, leaving the door open, ofcourse, because she knew that it is very foolish to shut oneself intoany wardrobe. And everyone asked her what was thematter."I'm sitting against a tree," said Susan, "and look! It's gettinglighter--over there.""By jove, you're right," said Peter, "and look there--and there. And take your whip. "He's the nice Faun Itold you about."Everyone agreed to this and off they went, walking briskly and stampingtheir feet. Beaver."A slow cruel smile came over the Witch's face."Is this all your news?" she asked."No, your Majesty," said Edmund, and proceeded to tell her all he hadheard before leaving the Beavers' house."What! Aslan?" cried the Queen, "Aslan! Is this true? You won't get into Narnia again by _that_ route. Beaver to fill the the kettle andlay the table and cut the bread and put the plates in the oven to heatand draw a huge jug of beer for Mr. Beaver from a barrel which stood inone corner of the house, and to put on the frying pan and get thedripping hot. She stayed behind because she thought it would be worth whiletrying the door of the wardrobe, even though she felt almost sure thatit would be locked. And thatnight there was a great feast in Cair Paravel, and revelry and dancing,and gold flashed and wine flowed, and answering to the music inside,but stranger, sweeter, and more piercing, came the music of the seapeople.But amidst all these rejoicings Aslan himself quietly slipped away.And when the Kings and Queens noticed that he wasn't there they saidnothing about it. Make ita surprise for them. At first she took no interest in this. He shivered.He now remembered that he had been looking for Lucy; and also howunpleasant he had been to her about her "imaginary country" which nowturned out not to have been imaginary at all. Peter wondered why she did not get higher orat least take a better grip; then he realised that she was just goingto faint and that if she fainted she would fall off.Peter did not feel very brave; indeed, he felt he was going to be sick.But that made no difference to what he had to do. Howwill you know? He is our brother after all, evenif he is rather a little beast, and he's only a kid.""Go to the Witch's house?" said Mrs. Don't you feel well?""I'm all right," said Edmund, but this was not true. Then he said,"We have a long journey to go. What? We had better put itagainst the trunk of a tree."Edmund found himself being roughly forced to his feet. How do we know thatthe fauns are in the right and the Queen (yes, I know we've been _told_she's a witch) is in the wrong? He had expected to find her in a few seconds and was verysurprised when he did not. "So you've got in too! Isn't it wonderful,and now--""All right," said Edmund, "I see you were right and it is a magicwardrobe after all. Can you remember?That evening after tea the four children all managed to get down to thebeach again and get their shoes and stockings off and feel the sandbetween their toes. The enemies also saw the difference."Why, he's only a great cat after all!" cried one."Is _that_ what we were afraid of?" said another.And they surged round Aslan jeering at him, saying things like "Puss,Puss! Poor Pussy," and "How many mice have you caught to-day, Cat?"and "Would you like a saucer of milk, Pussums?""Oh how _can_ they?" said Lucy, tears streaming down her cheeks. In fact I really think he might have given up the whole planand gone back and owned up and made friends with the others, if hehadn't happened to say to himself, "When I'm King of Narnia the firstthing I shall do will be to make some decent roads." And of coursethat set him off thinking about being a King and all the other thingshe would do and this cheered him up a good deal. And one year it fellout that Tumnus (who was a middle-aged Faun by now and beginning to bestout) came down river and brought them news that the White Stag hadonce more appeared in his parts--the White Stag who would give youwishes if you caught him. "I'm here. "In thisbottle," he said, "there is a cordial made of the juice of one of thefire-flowers that grow in the mountains of the sun. They also noticed that he now had a sortof modest expression on his face--the sort of look people have when youare visiting a garden they've made or reading a story they've written.So it was only common politeness when Susan said, "What a lovely dam!"And Mr. Beaver didn't say "Hush" this time but "Merely a trifle!Merely a trifle! And it isn't really finished!"Above the dam there was what ought to have been a deep pool but was nowof course a level floor of dark green ice. Each of the girls noticed forthe first time the white face of the other. And now at last Edmund remembered what the others had saidabout the White Witch turning people into stone. To her surprise it opened quite easily, and twomoth-balls dropped out.Looking into the inside, she saw several coats hanging up--mostly longfur coats. Beaver," replied he, "there may be two views aboutHumans (meaning no offence to the present company). The country all looked dark grey, butbeyond, at the very end of the world, the sea showed pale. It _is_," said Mr. Beaver. I know you're here."There was no answer and Edmund noticed that his own voice had a curioussound--not the sound you expect in a cupboard but a kind of open-airsound. Word has been sent that you _are_ to meet him, to-morrowif you can, at the Stone Table.""Where's that?" said Lucy."I'll show you," said Mr. Beaver. "Oh," thoughtLucy, "he's been seen. Then she felt a setof long whiskers tickling her cheek and saw the cold daylight coming inthrough the mouth of the cave. Thenhe made a leap high over their heads and landed on the other side ofthe Table. And next you would have thought thatthe stump did look really remarkably like a little fat man crouching onthe ground. The house was so large andcomplicated and full of hiding places that she thought she would havetime to have one look into the wardrobe and then hide somewhere else.But as soon as she reached it she heard steps in the passage outside,and then there was nothing for it but to jump into the wardrobe andhold the door closed behind her. But now that the snow had begunagain the scent was cold and even the footprints were covered up.Meanwhile the Dwarf whipped up the reindeer and the Witch and Edmunddrove out under the archway and on and away into the darkness and thecold. And when parties ofsight-seers arrived and asked to see the house, the Professor alwaysgave them permission, and Mrs. Hereare the Sons and Daughters of Adam and Eve"--and they all went in.The first thing Lucy noticed as she went in was a burring sound, andthe first thing she saw was a kind-looking old she-beaver sitting inthe corner with a thread in her mouth working busily at her sewingmachine and it was from it that the sound came. Nowis your chance to find the Witch and rescue the fourth Son of Adam."And instantly with a thunder of hoofs and a beating of wings a dozen orso of the swiftest creatures disappeared into the gathering darkness.Peter, still out of breath, turned and saw Aslan close at hand."You have forgotten to clean your sword," said Aslan.It was true. Even as it was, he gotwet through for he had to stoop to go under branches and great loads ofsnow came sliding off on to his back. He knows that unless I haveblood as the Law says all Narnia will be overturned and perish in fireand water.""It is very true," said Aslan; "I do not deny it.""Oh, Aslan!" whispered Susan in the Lion's ear, "can't we--I mean, youwon't, will you? Must more people die for Edmund?""I'm sorry, Aslan," said Lucy getting up and going with him. But as they went on walking and walking--and walking--and asthe sack she was carrying felt heavier and heavier, she began to wonderhow she was going to keep up at all. "Don't youunderstand?" said Mr. Beaver. "It isn't as if we wantedto take them out of the house; we shan't take them even out of thewardrobe.""I never thought of that, Su," said Peter. Then without waiting a moment he whisked round--almost as if hehad been a cat chasing its tail--and breathed also on the stone dwarf,which (as you remember) was standing a few feet from the lion with hisback to it. He was so huge that even when they got him there it took alltheir efforts to hoist him onto the surface of it. Not like a _tame_ lion."And now, as you see, this story is nearly (but not quite) at an end.These two Kings and two Queens governed Narnia well and long and happywas their reign. And they had not huntedlong before they had a sight of him. Then the mist turned from white to gold andpresently cleared away altogether. He felt tired all over.Then, after a bit, Susan came down the tree. Beaver tells you?Who said anything about safe? "He wouldn't send themif it weren't."A few minutes later the Witch herself walked out on to the top of thehill and came straight across and stood before Aslan. And after thethaw had been going on for some time they all realised that the Witchwould no longer be able to use her sledge. Andthen, as if that had been a signal, there was chattering and chirrupingin every direction, and then a moment of full song, and within fiveminutes the whole wood was ringing with birds' music, and whereverEdmund's eyes turned he saw birds alighting on branches, or sailingoverhead or having their little quarrels."Faster! Faster!" said the Witch.There was no trace of the fog now. It was cold stone. Right in the very middlestood a huge shape like a man, but as tall as a tree, with a fierceface and a shaggy beard and a great club in its right hand. Beaver'sown special rocking chair beside the fire) and preparing to enjoythemselves. "Look alive, everyone.Up stairs and down stairs and in my lady's chamber! Leave no cornerunsearched. How long has he been missing? She began to walk forward, _crunch-crunch_, overthe snow and through the wood towards the other light.In about ten minutes she reached it and found that it was a lamp-post.As she stood looking at it, wondering why there was a lamp-post in themiddle of a wood and wondering what to do next, she heard a pitterpatter of feet coming towards her. "There need be no flying. And the funny thing was thatwhen all three finally lay together panting in the sun the girls nolonger felt in the least tired or hungry or thirsty."And now," said Aslan presently, "to business. "You won't, will you?Indeed, indeed you really mustn't.""And if I don't," said he, beginning to cry again, "she's sure to findout. Ishall feel rather nervous about meeting a lion.""That you will, dearie, and no mistake," said Mrs. Then she noticed that there was something crunching under herfeet. And looking up thatvalley, Edmund could see two small hills, and he was almost sure theywere the two hills which the White Witch had pointed out to him when heparted from her at the lamp-post that other day. Farewell."And both the girls cried bitterly (though they hardly knew why) andclung to the Lion and kissed his mane and his nose and his paws and hisgreat, sad eyes. "Come out, Mrs. Presently the clouds parted overhead and thewinter sun came out and the snow all around them grew dazzlinglybright. But she'll keep himalive as long as he's the only one she's got, because she'll want touse him as a decoy; as bait to catch the rest of you with.""Oh, can _no_ one help us?" wailed Lucy."Only Aslan," said Mr. Beaver, "we must go on and meet him. It was a huge archbut the great iron gates stood wide open.Edmund crept up to the arch and looked inside into the courtyard, andthere he saw a sight that nearly made his heart stop beating. And with a great heave he rose underneath them andthen shot off, faster than any horse could go, downhill and into thethick of the forest.That ride was perhaps the most wonderful thing that happened to them inNarnia. "Is he here in the pavilion?""I don't think so.""Susan! Let's go outside and have a look round. We shall encampto-night at the Fords of Beruna."Of course everyone was dying to ask him how he had arranged matterswith the Witch; but his face was stern and everyone's ears were stillringing with the sound of his roar and so nobody dared.After a meal, which was taken in the open air on the hill-top (for thesun had got strong by now and dried the grass) they were busy for awhile taking the pavilion down and packing things up. It was abeautiful face in other respects, but proud and cold and stern.The sledge was a fine sight as it came sweeping towards Edmund with thebells jingling and the Dwarf cracking his whip and the snow flying upon each side of it."Stop!" said the Lady, and the Dwarf pulled the reindeer up so sharpthat they almost sat down. She rushed ahead of them,flung open the door of the wardrobe and cried, "Now! go in and see foryourselves.""Why, you goose," said Susan, putting her head inside and pulling thefur coats apart, "it's just an ordinary wardrobe, look! there's theback of it."Then everyone looked in and pulled the coats apart; and they allsaw--Lucy herself saw--a perfectly ordinary wardrobe. And she was one of theJinn. Nextmoment Lucy got rather a fright for she found herself caught up inmid-air between the Giant's finger and thumb. "They're always listening.Most of them are on our side, but there _are_ trees that would betrayus to _her_; you know who I mean," and it nodded its head several times."If it comes to talking about sides," said Edmund, "how do we knowyou're a friend?""Not meaning to be rude, Mr. Beaver," added Peter, "but you see, we'restrangers.""Quite right, quite right," said the Beaver. Go to bed yourself.""Hadn't we all better go to bed?" said Lucy. I don't suppose there ever was a worseFaun since the beginning of the world.""But what have you done?" asked Lucy."My old father, now," said Mr. Tumnus, "that's his picture over themantelpiece. Because they were so very white he could not see muchelse, it was so dark in this valley under the dark trees."Prepare the victim," said the Witch. And there, on the other side of the river, quite close tohim, in the middle of a little plain between two hills, he saw whatmust be the White Witch's house. It does not easily miss. At first she wondered whethershe would be able to find the way, but she recognised an odd-lookingtree in one place and a stump in another and brought them on to wherethe ground became uneven and into the little valley and at last to thevery door of Mr. Tumnus' cave. He's wild, you know. But whichever it is, what good do youthink you'll do by jeering and nagging at her one day and encouragingher the next?""I thought--I thought," said Edmund; but he couldn't think of anythingto say."You didn't think anything at all," said Peter, "it's just spite.You've always liked being beastly to anyone smaller than yourself;we've seen that at school before now.""Do stop it," said Susan; "it won't make things any better having a rowbetween you two. First the snow stopped. He hadn't reckoned on this; but he hadto make the best of it. Another dwarf appeared. Anyone could see from theold man's face that he was perfectly serious. Itwould be fun to keep it a secret between us two, wouldn't it? Because, as a matter of fact, so have I.""Something about Aslan," said Lucy. Understand that you have given me Narnia forever, youhave lost your own life and you have not saved his. But itwas too late to do anything about it now even if Aslan would havelistened to her. Lucy wasrunning towards him as fast as her short legs would carry her and herface was as white as paper. The courtyard looked nolonger like a museum; it looked more like a zoo. There wereTree-Women there and Well-Women (Dryads and Naiads as they used to becalled in our world) who had stringed instruments; it was they who hadmade the music. But I will skip on to the time when the snow hadstopped and the morning had come and they were racing along in thedaylight. And now"--here he suddenly looked less grave--"here issomething for the moment for you all!" and he brought out (I supposefrom the big bag at his back, but nobody quite saw him do it) a largetray containing five cups and saucers, a bowl of lump sugar, a jug ofcream, and a great big teapot all sizzling and piping hot. At last Lucy said,"I can't bear the look of that horrible muzzle. Doeshe know what the arrangement with the Witch really was?""Hush! No. Of course not," said Susan."Oughtn't he to be told?" said Lucy."Oh, surely not," said Susan. I thinkthe same idea had occurred to the leopards themselves; at any rate, asthey walked off their fur was all standing up on their backs and theirtails were bristling--like a cat's when it sees a strange dog."It'll be all right," whispered Peter in reply. But as for Lucy,she was always gay and golden haired, and all Princes in those partsdesired her to be their Queen, and her own people called her Queen Lucythe Valiant.So they lived in great joy and if ever they remembered their life inthis world it was only as one remembers a dream. Think of that; andthen take away the heavy noise of the hoofs and the jingle of theharness and imagine instead the almost noiseless padding of the greatpaws. And as they wenton, hour after hour, it did come to seem like a dream.This lasted longer than I could describe even if I wrote pages andpages about it. I didn'tlike to mention it before (he being your brother and all) but themoment I set eyes on that brother of yours I said to myself'Treacherous.' He had the look of one who has been with the Witch andeaten her food. The whole crowd of liberated statuessurged back into the courtyard. And when he reached her he had the sense tobring his sword smashing down on her wand instead of trying to go forher directly and simply getting made a statue himself for his pains.That was the mistake all the rest were making. And at last Lucy was so tired that she wasalmost asleep and walking at the same time when suddenly she found thatMr. Beaver had turned away from the river bank to the right and wasleading them steeply uphill into the very thickest bushes. Look at me, Daughter of Eve.Would you believe that I'm the sort of Faun to meet a poor innocentchild in the wood, one that had never done me any harm, and pretend tobe friendly with it, and invite it home to my cave, all for the sake oflulling it asleep and then handing it over to the White Witch?""No," said Lucy. Her face wasworking and twitching with passion, but his looked up at the sky, stillquiet, neither angry nor afraid, but a little sad. It must have been hours later when she shook herself and said,"Oh Mr. Tumnus--I'm so sorry to stop you, and I do love that tune--butreally, I must go home. The coatswere rather too big for them so that they came down to their heels andlooked more like royal robes than coats when they had put them on. The climb, comingat the end of the long day, made them all pant and blow. Beaver.It wasn't nearly such a nice cave as Mr. Tumnus's, Lucy thought--just ahole in the ground but dry and earthy. Then a wind sprang upand it became freezing cold. I'll take you to it!""But meanwhile what about poor Mr. Tumnus?" said Lucy."The quickest way you can help him is by going to meet Aslan," said Mr.Beaver, "once he's with us, then we can begin doing things. "Aha!" thought Edmund. But such people! Ogreswith monstrous teeth, and wolves, and bull-headed men; spirits of eviltrees and poisonous plants; and other creatures whom I won't describebecause if I did the grown-ups would probably not let you read thisbook--Cruels and Hags and Incubuses, Wraiths, Horrors, Efreets,Sprites, Orknies, Wooses, and Ettins. There's four loads and the smallest for thesmallest of us: that's you, my dear," she added looking at Lucy."Oh, do please come on," said Lucy."Well, I'm nearly ready now," answered Mrs. Then the ogre stood back and the children, watchingfrom their hiding-place, could see the face of Aslan looking all smalland different without its mane. And the Professor, who wasa very remarkable man, didn't tell them not to be silly or not to telllies, but believed the whole story. You are to be the Prince and--later on--the King; that isunderstood. Beaver."True enough, Mrs. She peeredcloser. Only youmustn't press him. "It is more magic."They looked round. "Oh Edmund, I _am_ glad you've got in too.The others will have to believe in Narnia now that both of us have beenthere. There'll be hawks.""Badgers!" said Lucy."Snakes!" said Edmund."Foxes!" said Susan.But when next morning came, there was a steady rain falling, so thickthat when you looked out of the window you could see neither themountains nor the woods nor even the stream in the garden."Of course it _would_ be raining!" said Edmund. And still they went on and on, with no sound but theeverlasting swish of the snow and the creaking of the reindeer'sharness. A moment later he lifted the club off hisshoulder, rubbed his eyes and said,"Bless me! I must have been asleep. "Don't go on talking likethat.""Like what?" said Susan; "and anyway, it's time you were in bed.""Trying to talk like Mother," said Edmund. "Think it over, Mr. Beaver.She can't be here for a quarter of an hour at least.""But don't we want as big a start as we can possibly get," said Peter,"if we're to reach the Stone Table before her?""You've got to remember _that_, Mrs. Shecomes of your father Adam's--" (here Mr. Beaver bowed) "your fatherAdam's first wife, her they called Lilith. The next thing they saw was a pavilionpitched on one side of the open place. He would have to admit that Lucy had been right, before allthe others, and he felt sure the others would all be on the side of theFauns and the animals; but he was already more than half on the side ofthe Witch. "I'm worried about having nofood with us. Then he sat listening to themwith the tips of his fingers pressed together and never interrupting,till they had finished the whole story. Heknew he could scramble to the top of the bank among bushes and brambleswithout being seen; and he wanted above all things to see which way theWitch's sledge went. And of course the longerthey went on doing this the more awkward they felt. "Taken service under the WhiteWitch. Luwas perfectly all right when we left home, but since we've been downhere she seems to be either going queer in the head or else turninginto a most frightful liar. There also seemed to be a curious noise all round them but thenoise of their driving and jolting and the Dwarf's shouting at thereindeer prevented Edmund from hearing what it was, until suddenly thesledge stuck so fast that it wouldn't go on at all. "Now, children, hold tight."Next moment the whole world seemed to turn upside down, and thechildren felt as if they had left their insides behind them; for theLion had gathered himself together for a greater leap than any he hadyet made and jumped--or you may call it flying rather thanjumping--right over the castle wall. He was tugging and pulling and the Wolf seemed neitheralive nor dead, and its bared teeth knocked against his forehead, andeverything was blood and heat and hair. "But it may be harder than youthink." And then he was silent again for some time. Neverin my time or my father's time. We must go and see him."They found Edmund in charge of Mrs. Fool, did you think that by all this you wouldsave the human traitor? There was a jug of creamy milk for the children (Mr.Beaver stuck to beer) and a great big lump of deep yellow butter in themiddle of the table from which everyone took as much as he wanted to gowith his potatoes and all the children thought--and I agree withthem--that there's nothing to beat good freshwater fish if you eat itwhen it has been alive half an hour ago and has come out of the panhalf a minute ago. Beaver said, "Now we're nearly ready." Susan drained thepotatoes and then put them all back in the empty pot to dry on the sideof the range while Lucy was helping Mrs. Don't you know who is the King of Beasts?Aslan is a lion--_the_ Lion, the great Lion.""Ooh!" said Susan, "I'd thought he was a man. He stooped down andwiped it quite clean on the grass, and then wiped it quite dry on hiscoat."Hand it to me and kneel, Son of Adam," said Aslan. Quick as lightning it turned round, itseyes flaming, and its mouth wide open in a howl of anger. What a mercy I thought of bringing the bread-knife."So down the steep bank they went and back to the cave, and Mr. Beavercut some of the bread and ham into sandwiches and Mrs. You had better put your fingers in your ears."And they did. But it never came. What do you mean?""I--I opened a door and just found myself here, your Majesty," saidEdmund."Ha!" said the Queen, speaking more to herself than to him. Did you see thosemountains as we came along? Here's a poor little kangaroo. But the Faun was so busy picking up hisparcels that at first he did not reply. It was the noise of running water. My name isTumnus.""I am very pleased to meet you, Mr. Tumnus," said Lucy."And may I ask, O Lucy, Daughter of Eve," said Mr. Tumnus, "how youhave come into Narnia?""Narnia? But Lucy could not properly enjoy any of it. Theytook a pail with them, Mr. Beaver sat down quietly at the edge of thehole (he didn't seem to mind it's being so chilly) looked hard into it,then suddenly shot in his paw, and before you could say Jack Robinsonhad whisked out a beautiful trout. There'sa wood inside it, and it's snowing, and there's a Faun and a witch andit's called Narnia; come and see."The others did not know what to think, but Lucy was so excited thatthey all went back with her into the room. "You are sure there are just four of you?"she asked. We half believed you.""But it wasn't a hoax at all," said Lucy, "really and truly. But Peter said,"Wouldn't it be better to camp on the far side--for fear she should trya night attack or anything?"Aslan who seemed to have been thinking about something else rousedhimself with a shake of his magnificent mane and said, "Eh? And this seemed toenrage all that rabble. "Stand well away from the gates, all you little 'uns."Then he strode to the gate himself and bang--bang--bang--went his hugeclub. Every moment his dead face lookednobler, as the light grew and they could see it better.In the wood behind them a bird gave a chuckling sound. Itwas the same day and the same hour of the day on which they had allgone into the wardrobe to hide. And still the talk between Aslan and the White Witch wenton.At last they heard Aslan's voice. "Do as you'retold. It was like that now.For a second after Aslan had breathed upon him the stone lion lookedjust the same. "Tellyou what is written on that very Table of Stone which stands beside us?Tell you what is written in letters deep as a spear is long on thetrunk of the World Ash Tree? I say!--I wonder can birds talk in Narnia? And you are thefirst I ever met. "If there really is a door in this house thatleads to some other world (and I should warn you that this is a verystrange house, and even I know very little about it)--if, I say, shehad got into another world, I should not be at all surprised to findthat that other world had a separate time of its own; so that howeverlong you stayed there it would never take up any of our time. Beaver handed round in the dark a little flask outof which everyone drank something--it made one cough and splutter alittle and stung the throat but it also made you feel deliciously warmafter you'd swallowed it--and everyone went straight to sleep.It seemed to Lucy only the next minute (though really it was hours andhours later) when she woke up feeling a little cold and dreadfullystiff and thinking how she would like a hot bath. Horrible things were happening wherever she looked."Off my back, children," shouted Aslan. Four hags, grinning andleering, yet also (at first) hanging back and half afraid of what theyhad to do, had approached him. Butif they could have seen what happened in that valley after they hadgone, I think they might have been surprised.It was perfectly still and presently the moon grew bright, if you hadbeen there you would have seen the moonlight shining on an oldtree-stump and on a fair sized boulder. Then he pounced on a tall stone Dryad which stood beyondthe dwarf, turned rapidly aside to deal with a stone rabbit on hisright, and rushed on to two centaurs. Inthe wide glades there were primroses. Then, when they were crossing awide open place where there were no shadows for them to hide in, hestopped and looked round. And she can turn people into stone anddo all kinds of horrible things. But when at last they were alltogether (which happened in the long room, where the suit of armourwas) Lucy burst out,"Peter! Susan! It's all true. But don't go trying to use the same routetwice. "What does it mean? I was hidden in the thickets andsaw it all. When he had been made to walk farfurther than he had ever known that anybody _could_ walk, the Witch atlast halted in a dark valley all overshadowed with fir trees and yewtrees. And I suppose this wholecountry is in the wardrobe."They immediately carried out Susan's very sensible plan. It's not much of a place but we must get a fewhours' sleep.""If you hadn't all been in such a plaguey fuss when we were starting,I'd have brought some pillows," said Mrs. Thenduring the moment of silence that followed his last remark, Lucysuddenly said:"I say--where's Edmund?"There was a dreadful pause, and then everyone began asking "Who saw himlast? I've come back, I'm all right."CHAPTER III_Edmund and the Wardrobe_Lucy ran out of the empty room into the passage and found the otherthree."It's all right," she repeated, "I've come back.""What on earth are you talking about, Lucy?" asked Susan."Why?" said Lucy in amazement, "haven't you all been wondering where Iwas?""So you've been hiding, have you?" said Peter. I'll lead the way. Even his own feet made no noise on thedeep newly fallen snow. How long this really lasted I don't know, but it seemed toEdmund to last for hours.Then at last he began to wonder why the lion was standing so still--forit hadn't moved one inch since he first set eyes on it. "But battles are ugly when womenfight. The snow was again falling as they came intothe courtyard but she took no notice of that and made Edmund sit besideher on the sledge. This was a terrible journey for Edmund who had no coat. (I hope you know what I mean by a voice sounding pale.)"It's an old hiding-place for beavers in bad times," said Mr. Beaver,"and a great secret. Didn't I tell you? "Don't you hear what Mrs. And of course there was no chance of going back to getit now. Hekept on slipping in the slush and mud and wet grass, and every time heslipped the Dwarf gave him a curse and sometimes a flick with the whip.The Witch walked behind the dwarf and kept on saying, "Faster! Faster!"Every moment the patches of green grew bigger and the patches of snowgrew smaller. But there'snot many taken in there that ever comes out again. I see thatnow. And this wet stuff is snow. The Witch's magic isweakening."And Lucy felt running through her that deep shiver of gladness whichyou only get if you are being solemn and still."And now," said Father Christmas, "for your presents. Then he said, "Yah! Silly oldAslan! How do you like being a stone? "His offence was not against you.""Have you forgotten the Deep Magic?" asked the Witch."Let us say I have forgotten it," answered Aslan gravely. All the hair on its back stood up onend. "Oh, you canmake your minds easy about that. His tail and his head hung low and he walkedslowly as if he were very, very tired. At first Peterthought it was a bear. If it hadnot been so angry that it simply had to howl it would have got him bythe throat at once. Then he said, "I shouldbe glad of company to-night. You can always tell them if you've lived long inNarnia, something about their eyes.""All the same," said Peter in a rather choking sort of voice, "we'llstill have to go and look for him. For Mr. Beaver had warned them, "He'll be coming andgoing" he had said. Beaver last of all. Why, I do believe we'vegot into Lucy's wood after all."And now there was no mistaking it and all four children stood blinkingin the daylight of a winter day. Beaver and the three otherchildren. For with wild cries and a noise of skirling pipes and shrillhorns blowing, the whole of that vile rabble came sweeping off thehill-top and down the slope right past their hiding-place. Finally, the clouds rolled away and themoon came out. One was that the sky on theEast side of the hill was a little less dark than it had been an hourago. He had just settledin his mind what sort of palace he would have and how many cars and allabout his private cinema and where the principal railways would run andwhat laws he would make against beavers and dams and was putting thefinishing touches to some schemes for keeping Peter in his place, whenthe weather changed. Call the Ghouls, and the Boggles, the Ogres and the Minotaurs.Call the Cruels, the Hags, the Spectres, and the people of theToadstools. I can't do it now, themagic will only work once. So next time you come youhave only to find the lamp-post and look for those two hills and walkthrough the wood till you reach my house. "We thoughtthere might be something wrong with Lucy.""Madness, you mean?" said the Professor quite coolly. In fact we shall be cut off from Aslan.""But that isn't what she'll do first," said Mrs. Then the moon disappeared and the snowbegan to fall once more. And so thingswent on until the next wet day.That day, when it came to the afternoon and there was still no sign ofa break in the weather, they decided to play hide-and-seek. One of hishands, as I have said, held the umbrella: in the other arm he carriedseveral brown paper parcels. And then betweenthem, he thought, must be her palace, only a mile off or less. The one nearest the door was a littleFaun with a very sad expression on its face, and Edmund couldn't helpwondering if this might be Lucy's friend. Withtraditions, you know. Nothing they could say toher made any difference. If the children had ever thought so, they were cured of it now.For when they tried to look at Aslan's face they just caught a glimpseof the golden mane and the great, royal, solemn, overwhelming eyes; andthen they found they couldn't look at him and went all trembly."Go on," whispered Mr. Beaver."No," whispered Peter, "you first.""No, Sons of Adam before animals," whispered Mr. Beaver back again."Susan," whispered Peter, "what about you? But this time it didn't immediately drawback. But of course they found itempty. Edmundsaw the drop for a second in mid-air, shining like a diamond. Beaver at last allowing herhusband to help her into her snow boots. At first the lions and dogs wentnosing about in all directions. "This is going to be a wonderful place forbirds. Justinside the gate, with the moonlight shining on it, stood an enormouslion crouched as if it was ready to spring. It at oncehopped away but only as far as to the next tree. He just went on looking at Aslan. The time to use them is perhaps near at hand. He opened the door. And now--"Oh yes. What with the parcels and the snow itlooked just as if he had been doing his Christmas shopping. "Of all the cheek--""Peace, Beaver," said Aslan. There was nothing stirring; notthe slightest sound anywhere. Four Hags, holdingfour torches, stood at the corners of the Table. Then another birdanswered it. Is he outside?" And then allrushed to the door and looked out. He now saw from the way the lion was standing thatit couldn't have been looking at him at all. But themoment it touched the snow there was a hissing sound and there stood ajewelled cup full of something that steamed. But he is only one, and he is easily dealt with." As shespoke these words she rose from her seat and looked Edmund full in theface, her eyes flaming; at the same moment she raised her wand. It is he, not you, that will save Mr. Tumnus.""She won't turn him into stone too?" said Edmund."Lord love you, Son of Adam, what a simple thing to say!" answered Mr.Beaver with a great laugh. "But please let me go home.""Of course I will," said the Faun. And the tune he played madeLucy want to cry and laugh and dance and go to sleep all at the sametime. They were little grey things."Ugh!" said Susan from the other side of the Table. It had been sostill for hours and hours that it startled them. For instance--if you willexcuse me for asking the question--does your experience lead you toregard your brother or your sister as the more reliable? Still--a robin you know. Come out,Sons and Daughters of Adam and Eve. In this way it led them on, slightlydown hill. Unless you have looked at aworld of snow as long as Edmund had been looking at it, you will hardlybe able to imagine what a relief those green patches were after theendless white. "This is_spring_. Out they went, plunging well overtheir ankles into the soft new snow, and went round the house in everydirection. And after that--whether it was that they lost theirheads, or that Mrs. Butpresently he added, "All the same it was well thought of. And soon Edmund noticed thatthe snow which splashed against them as they rushed through it was muchwetter than it had been all last night. Presently they actually crossed a stream.Beyond it they found snowdrops growing."Mind your own business!" said the Dwarf when he saw that Edmund hadturned his head to look at them; and he gave the rope a vicious jerk.But of course this didn't prevent Edmund from seeing. "I've been having lunch with dearMr. Tumnus, the Faun, and he's very well and the White Witch has donenothing to him for letting me go, so he thinks she can't have found outand perhaps everything is going to be all right after all.""The White Witch?" said Edmund, "who's she?""She is a perfectly terrible person," said Lucy. You will know what to do if you find them!""I hear and obey, O Queen," growled the Wolf; and immediately he shotaway into the snow and darkness, as quickly as a horse can gallop. At the same time he noticedthat he was feeling much less cold. And don't talk too much about it even amongyourselves. "No, I'm a bad Faun. Edmund felt much better as he began to sip the hot drink.It was something he had never tasted before, very sweet and foamy andcreamy, and it warmed him right down to his toes."It is dull, Son of Adam, to drink without eating," said the Queenpresently. Wherever the Robin alighted a little shower of snow wouldfall off the branch. You at least know the magic which theEmperor put into Narnia at the very beginning. But nothing would stop him. Then the sledge stopped again."It's no good, your Majesty," said the Dwarf. And here's a packet of tea, andthere's sugar, and some matches. That's the worst of young kids,they always--""Look here," said Peter turning on him savagely, "shut up! You've beenperfectly beastly to Lu ever since she started this nonsense about thewardrobe and now you go playing games with her about it and setting heroff again. It's something thatdoesn't want to be seen.""Let's go home," said Susan. "Comes of being out of condition. And she'll have my tail cut off, and my horns sawn off, and mybeard plucked out, and she'll wave her wand over my beautiful clovenhoofs and turn them into horrid solid hoofs like a wretched horse's.And if she is extra and specially angry she'll turn me into stone and Ishall be only a statue of a Faun in her horrible house until the fourthrones at Cair Paravel are filled--and goodness knows when that willhappen, or whether it will ever happen at all.""I'm very sorry, Mr. Tumnus," said Lucy. You cantell the Professor or you can write to Mother or you can do anythingyou like. The White Witch rose and went out, orderingEdmund to go with her. He turned away and began to cross the courtyard.As he got into the middle of it he saw that there were dozens ofstatues all about--standing here and there rather as the pieces standon a chess board when it is half way through the game. "I'm akidnapper for her, that's what I am. Igot that from a bird who saw it done.""But where's he been taken to?" asked Lucy."Well, they were heading northwards when they were last seen and we allknow what that means.""No, we don't," said Susan. And she has made a magic so that itis always winter in Narnia--always winter, but it never gets toChristmas. That meant him and me." At least hewent on saying this till Aslan had loaded him up with three dwarfs, oneDryad, two rabbits, and a hedgehog. There is acountry you can get to through the wardrobe. It was growing darkerevery minute and what with that and the snowflakes swirling all roundhim he could hardly see three feet ahead. Statues. He thought that she mustbe somewhere quite close and so he shouted, "Lucy! Lucy! I'm heretoo--Edmund."There was no answer."She's angry about all the things I've been saying lately," thoughtEdmund. Ladies, take these Daughters ofEve to the pavilion and minister to them."When the girls had gone Aslan laid his paw--and though it was velvetedit was very heavy--on Peter's shoulder and said, "Come, Son of Adam,and I will show you a far-off sight of the castle where you are to beKing."And Peter with his sword still drawn in his hand went with the Lion tothe eastern edge of the hill-top. I've got to go home at once. Right in here. The others all sat in the cave waiting andwondering. "I suppose the sewingmachine's too heavy to bring?""Yes. They all lookedat it in surprise, till suddenly Lucy said, "Oh, of course. "She'll have to keep to the top, for you couldn't bring a sledgedown here."It would have been a pretty enough scene to look at it through a windowfrom a comfortable armchair; and even as things were, Lucy enjoyed itat first. Then suddenly they felt coatsaround them instead of branches and next moment they were both standingoutside the wardrobe in the empty room."I say," said Lucy, "you do look awful, Edmund. Odd things, theysay--even their looks--will let the secret out. "He'll write to Father ifhe thinks there is really something wrong with Lu," said Peter; "it'sgetting beyond us." So they went and knocked at the study door, andthe Professor said "Come in," and got up and found chairs for them andsaid he was quite at their disposal. "The whole wood isfull of _her_ spies. For instance, had we started talkingof Aslan before he left? Ladies first.""No, you're the eldest," whispered Susan. "Never met a nicerhandkerchee. Call Aslan--Phew!How it smells in here--Look out for trap-doors--Up here! There are awhole lot more on the landing!" But the best of all was when Lucy camerushing upstairs shouting out,"Aslan! Aslan! I've found Mr. Tumnus. He was too tired even to notice how hungryand thirsty he was. Lucy saw her face lifted towards him for one second withan expression of terror and amazement. There was also a unicorn, and a bull with thehead of a man, and a pelican, and an eagle, and a great dog. But I think we must tryto do something for Mr. Whatever-his-name is--I mean the Faun.""That's what I feel too," said Peter. Ifthey are already gone, then make all speed to the Stone Table, but donot be seen. Nobody answered."Speak, vermin!" she said again. Eitheryour sister is telling lies, or she is mad, or she is telling thetruth. Hedoesn't like being tied down--and of course he has other countries toattend to. "Yes," she said,"I can see the wardrobe door.""Then be off home as quick as you can," said the Faun, "and--c-can youever forgive me for what I meant to do?""Why, of course I can," said Lucy, shaking him heartily by the hand."And I do hope you won't get into dreadful trouble on my account.""Farewell, Daughter of Eve," said he. She took astep further in--then two or three steps--always expecting to feelwoodwork against the tips of her fingers. "Are they _still_ afraid ofhim, even now?"When once Aslan had been tied (and tied so that he was really a mass ofcords) on the flat stone, a hush fell on the crowd. Edmund simply sank down and lay on his face, doing nothing atall and not even caring what was going to happen next provided theywould let him lie still. And much nearer there was a drip-drip-drip from the branchesof all the trees. Yes, of courseyou'll get back to Narnia again some day. And oh, how miserable he was. "Oh, how I wish we'd never come.""What on earth are we to do, Mr. Beaver?" said Peter."Do?" said Mr. Beaver who was already putting on his snow boots, "do?We must be off at once. "I don't want dry bread." Butthe Witch suddenly turned on him with such a terrible expression on herface that he apologised and began to nibble at the bread, though it wasso stale he could hardly get it down."You may be glad enough of it before you taste bread again," said theWitch.While he was still chewing away the first dwarf came back and announcedthat the sledge was ready. As theothers drew nearer Aslan turned to meet them bringing Edmund with him."Here is your brother," he said, "and--there is no need to talk to himabout what is past."Edmund shook hands with each of the others and said to each of them inturn, "I'm sorry," and everyone said "That's all right." And theneveryone wanted very hard to say something which would make it quiteclear that they were all friends with him again--something ordinary andnatural--and of course no one could think of anything in the world tosay. It was shining because it was acastle and of course the sunlight was reflected from all the windowswhich looked towards Peter and the sunset; but to Peter it looked likea great star resting on the seashore."That, O Man," said Aslan, "is Cair Paravel of the four thrones, in oneof which you must sit as King. "Here is my token." Withthese words it held up to them a little white object. Stop!"and they did.How Edmund hoped she was going to say something about breakfast! Butshe had stopped for quite a different reason. I am delighted.That is to say--" and then he stopped as if he had been going to saysomething he had not intended but had remembered in time. He'll settle the WhiteQueen all right. There seemed,indeed, no more to say and presently the four resumed their journey;but Edmund was saying to himself, "I'll pay you all out for this, youpack of stuck-up, self-satisfied prigs.""Where _are_ we going anyway?" said Susan, chiefly for the sake ofchanging the subject."I think Lu ought to be the leader," said Peter, "goodness knows shedeserves it. And she stopped looking at thedazzling brightness of the frozen river with all its waterfalls of iceand at the white masses of the tree-tops and the great glaring moon andthe countless stars and could only watch the little short legs of Mr.Beaver going pad-pad-pad-pad through the snow in front of her as ifthey were never going to stop. He went to it, there was a flight of stonesteps going up to an open door. Then she raised her wand. Hedid want Turkish Delight and to be a Prince (and later a King) and topay Peter out for calling him a beast. He was feelingvery sick."Come on then," said Lucy, "let's find the others. Then at last Peterrealised that it was up to him. Her knowledgegoes back only to the dawn of Time. Her arms were bare underneath it andterribly white. The centaurs stampeduneasily with their hoofs. Then said King Peter (for they talked in quite a differentstyle now, having been Kings and Queens for so long) "Fair Consorts,let us now alight from our horses and follow this beast into thethicket; for in all my days I never hunted a nobler quarry.""Sir," said the others, "even so let us do."So they alighted and tied their horses to trees and went on into thethick wood on foot. But when youreally see them in Narnia it is rather different. Peter blushed when he looked at the bright blade and sawit all smeared with the Wolf's hair and blood. "Allow me to introduce myself. Then Mr. Tumnus stooped and tooka flaming piece of wood out of the fire with a neat little pair oftongs, and lit a lamp. "But how queer. There a beautiful sight met theireyes. Beaver--was that their brother had been rescued and brought intocamp late last night; and was at that moment with Aslan. That is where it has always beendone before.""It will be a long time now before the Stone Table can again be put toits proper use," said the Dwarf."True," said the Witch; and then, "Well, I will begin."At that moment with a rush and a snarl a Wolf rushed up to them."I have seen them. Theweather was fine and they were out of doors from morning to night,bathing, fishing, climbing trees, birds' nesting, and lying in theheather. Of course everyonepresent knew that she meant Edmund. "Excuse me--I don't wantto be inquisitive--but should I be right in thinking that you are aDaughter of Eve?""My name's Lucy," said she, not quite understanding him."But you are--forgive me--you are what they call a girl?" asked theFaun."Of course I'm a girl," said Lucy."You are in fact Human?""Of course I'm human," said Lucy, still a little puzzled."To be sure, to be sure," said the Faun. I will make yourbrother a Duke and your sisters Duchesses.""There's nothing special about _them_," said Edmund, "and, anyway, Icould always bring them some other time.""Ah, but once you were in my house," said the Queen, "you might forgetall about them. But before they drove off she called Fenris Ulf andhe came bounding like an enormous dog to the side of the sledge."Take with you the swiftest of your wolves and go at once to the houseof the Beavers," said the Witch, "and kill whatever you find there. But if theProfessor was right it was only the beginning of the adventures ofNarnia. It was such a romp as no one has ever had except in Narnia; andwhether it was more like playing with a thunderstorm or playing with akitten Lucy could never make up her mind. And he had heard the conversation and hadn'tenjoyed it much either, because he kept on thinking that the otherswere taking no notice of him and trying to give him the cold shoulder.They weren't, but he imagined it. "Whatdo you mean? At the bottom of one small valley Mr. Tumnus turnedsuddenly aside as if he were going to walk straight into an unusuallylarge rock, but at the last moment Lucy found he was leading her intothe entrance of a cave. You know that everytraitor belongs to me as my lawful prey and that for every treachery Ihave a right to a kill.""Oh," said Mr. Beaver. And his heart gave agreat leap (though he hardly knew why) when he realised that the frostwas over. Presently he stumbled and gavea low moan."Aslan! Dear Aslan!" said Lucy, "what is wrong? They got it out in theend, and by being very cruel to the reindeer the Dwarf managed to getit on the move again, and they drove a little further. It seemed to be alltowers; little towers with long pointed spires on them, sharp asneedles. Daughter of Eve from the far land of Spare Oom where eternalsummer reigns around the bright city of War Drobe, how would it be ifyou came and had tea with me?""Thank you very much, Mr. Tumnus," said Lucy. It was the sound ofa knife being sharpened!At that very moment he heard loud shouts from every direction--adrumming of hoofs and a beating of wings--a scream from theWitch--confusion all round him. "Once the feet are putright, all the rest of him will follow.""That wasn't exactly what I meant," whispered Susan to Lucy. A little lower down the river there was another small riverwhich came down another small valley to join it. It's too dreadful and it's all on my account.""I don't doubt you'd save him if you could, dearie," said Mrs. It will be a pleasure," said GiantRumblebuffin. "Either some dreadful thing thatis going to happen to him, or something dreadful that he's going to do.""There's been something wrong with him all afternoon," said Susan."Lucy! What was that he said about not being with us at the battle?You don't think he could be stealing away and leaving us to-night, doyou?""Where is he now?" said Lucy. Edmund felt a sensation of mysterious horror. It was a great grimslab of grey stone supported on four upright stones. And Susan grew into a tall andgracious woman with black hair that fell almost to her feet and theKings of the countries beyond the sea began to send ambassadors askingfor her hand in marriage. She stuck to her story and said:"I don't care what you think, and I don't care what you say. A minute later theycame out under the open sky (the sun was still shining) and foundthemselves looking down on a fine sight.They were standing on the edge of a steep, narrow valley at the bottomof which ran--at least it would have been running if it hadn't beenfrozen--a fairly large river. He didn't likethis at all and began groping wildly in every direction; he evenshouted out. Then imagine instead of the black or grey or chestnut back ofthe horse the soft roughness of golden fur, and the mane flying back inthe wind. If I find youhave lied to me--""Please, I'm only repeating what they said," stammered Edmund.But the Queen, who was no longer attending to him, clapped her hands.Instantly the same dwarf whom Edmund had seen with her before appeared."Make ready our sledge," ordered the Witch, "and use the harnesswithout bells."CHAPTER X_The Spell Begins to Break_Now we must go back to Mr. and Mrs. But next day was more solemn. And out in the middle, and partly on the top of the dam, was afunny little house shaped rather like an enormous bee-hive and from ahole in the roof smoke was going up, so that when you saw it(especially if you were hungry) you at once thought of cooking andbecame hungrier than you were before.That was what the others chiefly noticed, but Edmund noticed somethingelse. As the travellers walked under them thelight also became green. In my own house it would be another matter.""Why can't we go to your house now?" said Edmund. You had better keep theriver on your right when you get to it. She stood by Aslan's head. Make it Pax."Still there was no answer."Just like a girl," said Edmund to himself, "sulking somewhere, andwon't accept an apology." He looked round him again and decided he didnot much like this place, and had almost made up his mind to go home,when he heard, very far off in the wood, a sound of bells. Tie the hands of the human creature behind it and keep hold ofthe end of the rope. He saw theWitch take off her outer mantle. But at that moment Lucy said,"Oh, Susan! Look! Look at the lion."I expect you've seen someone put a lighted match to a bit of newspaperwhich is propped up in a grate against an unlit fire. But when you are dead whatwill prevent me from killing him as well? He hid me from the Witch andshowed me the way back. "You must use the bow only in great need," he said, "for I donot mean you to fight in the battle. And why shouldn't she?""No, Peter, I'm not," she said. There's no doubt he was taken off by the police. The little chap wasnone the worse for having been a statue and was of course veryinterested in all she had to tell him.But at last the ransacking of the Witch's fortress was ended. Oh sorry it's only anold stump!" But just at this point Edmund went off in a dead faint.Presently the centaurs and unicorns and deer and birds (they were ofcourse the rescue party which Aslan had sent in the last chapter) allset off to go back to the Stone Table, carrying Edmund with them. It's quite all right. "Two Sons of Adam and two Daughters of Eve, neither morenor less?" and Edmund, with his mouth full of Turkish Delight, kept onsaying, "Yes, I told you that before," and forgetting to call her "YourMajesty" but she didn't seem to mind now.At last the Turkish Delight was all finished and Edmund was lookingvery hard at the empty box and wishing that she would ask him whetherhe would like some more. "Wait a minute.""Daughter of Eve," said Aslan in a graver voice, "others also are atthe point of death. ("But supposing it turnsits head?" thought Edmund.) In fact it was staring at somethingelse--namely a little dwarf who stood with his back to it about fourfeet away. It can't hurt me," and he raised his leg to step overit. At any rate that was how itfelt to these two. I meanwhile must go manymiles to the West before I find a place where I can drive across theriver. They felt very glad, but also solemn."I've come at last," said he. "By gum!" whispered Peter to Susan. "I think they're friendly mice.Poor little things--they don't realise he's dead. "But I was wonderingwhether I ought to be getting back.""It's only just round the corner," said the Faun, "and there'll be aroaring fire--and toast--and sardines--and cake.""Well, it's very kind of you," said Lucy. Bear them well."With these words he handed to Peter a shield and a sword. You know she doesn't tell lies and it is obvious that she isnot mad. How much he can tellher depends on how much he heard. It'strees all round. Then hecried out "A Merry Christmas! Long live the true King!" and crackedhis whip and he and the reindeer and the sledge and all were out ofsight before anyone realised that they had started.Peter had just drawn his sword out of its sheath and was showing it toMr. Beaver when Mrs. And itseems to me we should be shamed if for any fearing or foreboding weturned back from following so noble a beast as now we have in chase.""And so say I," said King Edmund. After him, all of you! He will be going to his mistress. They went in single file--first Mr. Beaver, then Lucy, thenPeter, then Susan, and Mrs. And when at last Edmund plucked up hiscourage to say, "Please, your Majesty, could I have some TurkishDelight? Butthey all felt a good deal warmer and each thought the others lookedbetter in their new get-up and more suitable to the landscape."We can pretend we are Arctic explorers," said Lucy."This is going to be exciting enough without any pretending," saidPeter, as he began leading the way forward into the forest. It wasn't a very goodexcuse, however, for deep down inside him he really knew that the WhiteWitch was bad and cruel.The first thing he realised when he got outside and found the snowfalling all around him, was that he had left his coat behind in theBeavers' house. And that was theend of that conversation.After this things were a good deal better for Lucy. Beaver pouredout the tea and everyone enjoyed himself. They're nibbling away atthe cords!""That's what I thought," said Lucy. But theenemies, out of pure spitefulness had drawn the cords so tight that thegirls could make nothing of the knots.I hope no one who reads this book has been quite as miserable as Susanand Lucy were that night; but if you have been--if you've been up allnight and cried till you have no more tears left in you--you will knowthat there comes in the end a sort of quietness. Wait for me there in hiding. Summonall our people to meet me here as speedily as they can. But the Lion was rushingdown at such a speed that it grew larger every moment and before theyhad time even to ask themselves what it was they were already on alevel with it. Beaver whostarted picking up sacks and laying them on the table and said: "Now,Mr. Beaver, just reach down that ham. And Aslan, not at all slacking his pace, rushedstraight as a bullet towards it."The Witch's home!" he cried. Then Lion and Witch had rolledover together but with the Witch underneath; and at the same moment allwar-like creatures whom Aslan had led from the Witch's house rushedmadly on the enemy's line, dwarfs with their battle-axes, dogs withteeth, the giant with his club (and his feet also crushed dozens of thefoe) unicorns with their horns, centaurs with swords and hoofs. "All the Buffins always were. And then, as he looked at one tree he saw a greatload of snow slide off it and for the first time since he had enteredNarnia he saw the dark green of a fir tree. They began to come back to Aslan's throne.The Witch was just turning away with a look of fierce joy on her facewhen she stopped and said,"But how do I know this promise will be kept?""Wow!" roared Aslan half rising from his throne; and his great mouthopened wider and wider and the roar grew louder and louder, and theWitch, after staring for a moment with her lips wide apart, picked upher skirts and fairly ran for her life.CHAPTER XIV_The Triumph of the Witch_As soon as the Witch had gone Aslan said, "We must move from this placeat once, it will be wanted for other purposes. Beaver," said Mr. Beaver, "I've found them. They're good birds inall the stories I've ever read. But it was really a very sensible one. At first much of their time was spent in seeking outthe remnants of the White Witch's army and destroying them, and indeedfor a long time there would be news of evil things lurking in thewilder parts of the forest--a haunting here and a killing there, aglimpse of a werewolf one month and a rumour of a hag the next. And hecontinued giving Peter his instructions.For the last part of the journey it was Susan and Lucy who saw most ofhim. Creatures wererunning after Aslan and dancing round him till he was almost hidden inthe crowd. There was the great shape of acentaur and a winged horse and a long lithe creature that Edmund tookto be a dragon. Beaver. For that's another of the old rhymes:-- When Adam's flesh and Adam's bone Sits at Cair Paravel in throne, The evil time will be over and done.So things must be drawing near their end now he's come and you've come.We've heard of Aslan coming into these parts before--long ago, nobodycan say when. One of themost respected of all the giant families in Narnia. And hethought about Turkish Delight and about being a King ("And I wonder howPeter will like that?" he asked himself) and horrible ideas came intohis head."Here we are," said Mr. Beaver, "and it looks as if Mrs. "A great deal too heavy. Beaver isexpecting us. They heard voices. She's caught him!"Great was their surprise when, a little later, they heard Mr. Beaver'svoice calling to them from just outside the cave."It's all right," he was shouting. "Or do you want my dwarf to find youa tongue with his whip? She had kept hold of her wand also, so it had been keptsafe, too.When the other children woke up next morning (they had been sleeping onpiles of cushions in the pavilion) the first thing they heard--fromMrs. "Should you likethat?""Yes please, your Majesty," said Edmund, whose teeth were chattering.The Queen took from somewhere among her wrappings a very small bottlewhich looked as if it were made of copper. "Do you see that lamp?" Shepointed with her wand and Edmund turned and saw the same lamp-postunder which Lucy had met the Faun. Even if this had not been their way,they couldn't have kept to the river valley once the thaw began, forwith all that melting snow the river was soon in flood--a wonderful,roaring, thundering yellow flood--and their path would have been underwater.And now the sun got low and the light got redder and the shadows gotlonger and the flowers began to think about closing."Not long now," said Mr. Beaver, and began leading them uphill acrosssome very deep, springy moss (it felt nice under their tired feet) in aplace where only tall trees grew, very wide apart. For a momenthe couldn't think what it was. He fought hisway through three ogres to where she was just turning one of yourleopards into a statue. And we'vegot to find him. He had bounded up to the stone lion and breathed onhim. There were lovely stone shapes that looked like women butwho were really the spirits of trees. I'll say I'm sorry if you like. Probably the Queen knew quite well what hewas thinking; for she knew, though Edmund did not, that this wasenchanted Turkish Delight and that anyone who had once tasted it wouldwant more and more of it, and would even, if they were allowed, go oneating it till they killed themselves. Just for fun, ofcourse. Then it disappeared again. "Not that it isn't alwayswinter now," he added gloomily. "By likelihood when this post and this lampwere set here there were smaller trees in the place, or fewer, or none.For this is a young wood and the iron post is old." And they stoodlooking upon it. That's what it means by comforting the Queen'senemies and fraternising with Humans. "Delighted,delighted," he went on. Then he realised that it was awolf--a wolf standing on its hind legs, with its front paws against thetree-trunk snapping and snarling. The mice crept awayagain.The girls cleared away the remains of the gnawed ropes. But she did want to have one more look insideit; for by this time she was beginning to wonder herself whether Narniaand the Faun had not been a dream. And they made good lawsand kept the peace and saved good trees from being unnecessarily cutdown, and liberated young dwarfs and young satyrs from being sent toschool, and generally stopped busybodies and interferers and encouragedordinary people who wanted to live and let live. Ha! Ha! Ha!""Take it away," said Edmund sulkily. "These are for you,"and he handed her a bow and a quiver full of arrows and a little ivoryhorn. "Up till now,I'd have said Lucy every time.""And what do you think, my dear?" said the Professor, turning to Susan."Well," said Susan, "in general, I'd say the same as Peter, but thiscouldn't be true--all this about the wood and the Faun.""That is more than I know," said the Professor, "and a charge of lyingagainst someone whom you have always found truthful is a very seriousthing; a very serious thing indeed.""We were afraid it mightn't even be lying," said Susan. "Don't you see? What are we to do? "He's gone to _her_, to the White Witch.He has betrayed us all.""Oh surely--oh really!" said Susan, "he can't have done that.""Can't he?" said Mr. Beaver looking very hard at the three children,and everything they wanted to say died on their lips for each feltsuddenly quite certain inside that this was exactly what Edmund haddone."But will he know the way?" said Peter."Has he been in this country before?" asked Mr. Beaver, "has he everbeen here alone?""Yes," said Lucy almost in a whisper, "I'm afraid he has.""And did he tell you what he'd done or who he'd met?""Well, no, he didn't," said Peter."Then mark my words," said Mr. Beaver, "he has already met the WhiteWitch and joined her side, and been told where she lives. Dear Mr. Tumnus, do tellme what is wrong." But the Faun continued sobbing as if his heartwould break. (Their names were Ivy, Margaret and Betty, but they do notcome into the story much.) He himself was a very old man with shaggywhite hair, which grew over most of his face as well as on his head,and they liked him almost at once; but on the first evening when hecame out to meet them at the front door he was so odd-looking that Lucy(who was the youngest) was a little afraid of him, and Edmund (who wasthe next youngest) wanted to laugh and had to keep on pretending he wasblowing his nose to hide it.As soon as they had said good night to the Professor and gone upstairson the first night, the boys came into the girls' room and they alltalked it over."We've fallen on our feet and no mistake," said Peter. Nor would thecoats be much use by now if you did! Eh? When that happenedthere was a moment's silence. He had been frightened of amere statue!The relief which Edmund felt was so great that in spite of the cold hesuddenly got warm all over right down to his toes, and at the same timethere came into his head what seemed a perfectly lovely idea."Probably," he thought, "this is the great Lion Aslan that they wereall talking about. And every time this happened hethought more and more how he hated Peter--just as if all this had beenPeter's fault.But at last he came to a part where it was more level and the valleyopened out. Mr. Beaver led themacross the dam and onto the right bank of the river and then along avery rough sort of path among the trees right down by the river-bank.The sides of the valley, shining in the moonlight, towered up far abovethem on either hand. They're in the little house on top of thedam just up the river--with Mr. and Mrs. But you're sosorry for it that I'm sure you will never do it again.""Daughter of Eve, don't you understand?" said the Faun. Beaver, "not if I knowher. They had been travelling in this way for about half an hour,with the two girls in front, when Edmund said to Peter, "If you're notstill too high and mighty to talk to me, I've something to say whichyou'd better listen to.""What is it?" asked Peter."Hush! Not so loud," said Edmund, "there's no good frightening thegirls. A mad chase began. Most of theenemy had been killed in the first charge of Aslan and his companions;and when those who were still living saw that the Witch was dead theyeither gave themselves up or took to flight. And it was then that someone (Tumnus,I think) first said,"But how are we going to get out?" for Aslan had got in by a jump andthe gates were still locked."That'll be all right," said Aslan; and then, rising on his hind-legs,he bawled up at the Giant. It runs in my mind that I have seen the like before; as itwere in a dream, or in the dream of a dream.""Sir," answered they all, "it is even so with us also.""And more," said Queen Lucy, "for it will not go out of my mind that ifwe pass this post and lantern, either we shall find strange adventuresor else some great change of our fortunes.""Madam," said King Edmund, "the like foreboding stirreth in my heartalso.""And in mine, fair brother," said King Peter."And in mine too," said Queen Susan. Then Susan pulledherself together and said, "But Edmund said they had only beenpretending.""That is a point," said the Professor, "which certainly deservesconsideration; very careful consideration. Then he opened agreat red mouth, warm and living, and gave a prodigious yawn. He did not look either clever or handsomewhatever the Queen might say."Oh, but if I took you there now," said she, "I shouldn't see yourbrother and your sisters. That old chap will let us do anything welike.""I think he's an old dear," said Susan."Oh, come off it!" said Edmund, who was tired and pretending not to betired, which always made him bad-tempered. The onebig star had almost disappeared. And down they both knelt in the wet grass andkissed his cold face and stroked his beautiful fur--what was left ofit--and cried till they could cry no more. Macready, the housekeeper, showed themround, telling them about the pictures and the armour, and the rarebooks in the library. And, oh,the cry of the sea gulls! Have you heard it? It was no good trying to run away so theycame towards him. It didn't looknow as if the Witch intended to make him a King! All the things he hadsaid to make himself believe that she was good and kind and that herside was really the right side sounded to him silly now. There, far to the East, was something twinkling andmoving. He took a stump of lead pencil outof his pocket and scribbled a moustache on the lion's upper lip andthen a pair of spectacles on its eyes. She seemedespecially interested in the fact that there were four of them, andkept on coming back to it. The others will bewondering what has happened to me." But a moment later she asked, "Mr.Tumnus! Whatever is the matter?" for the Faun's brown eyes had filledwith tears and then the tears began trickling down his cheeks, and soonthey were running off the end of his nose; and at last he covered hisface with his hands and began to howl."Mr. Tumnus! Mr. Tumnus!" said Lucy in great distress. Indeed, don't _try_ to get there at all. He decided to open the door again and letin some light. From the waist upwards he was likea man, but his legs were shaped like a goat's (the hair on them wasglossy black) and instead of feet he had goat's hoofs. Stop itat once! You ought to be ashamed of yourself, a great big Faun likeyou. "Oh don't,don't, please don't," shouted Edmund, but even while he was shoutingshe had waved her wand and instantly where the merry party had beenthere were only statues of creatures (one with its stone fork fixedforever half-way to its stone mouth) seated round a stone table onwhich there were stone plates and a stone plum pudding."As for you," said the Witch, giving Edmund a stunning blow on the faceas she re-mounted the sledge, "let that teach you to ask favour forspies and traitors. Edmund and I both got in.We met one another in there, in the wood. Eventhough he knew that it was only a stone giant and not a live one,Edmund did not like going past it.He now saw that there was a dim light showing from a doorway on the farside of the courtyard. Each piece was sweet and light to the very centre andEdmund had never tasted anything more delicious. And as soon as they had entered it Queen Susansaid,"Fair friends, here is a great marvel, for I seem to see a tree ofiron.""Madam," said King Edmund, "if you look well upon it you shall see itis a pillar of iron with a lantern set on the top thereof.""Marry, a strange device," said King Peter, "to set a lantern herewhere the trees cluster so thick about it and so high above it that ifit were lit it should give light to no man!""Sir," said Queen Lucy. "All those stoneanimals--and people too! It's--it's like a museum.""Hush," said Susan, "Aslan's doing something."He was indeed. A wonderful pavilion itwas--and especially now when the light of the setting sun fell uponit--with sides of what looked like yellow silk and cords of crimson andtent-pegs of ivory; and high above it on a pole a banner, which bore ared rampant lion, fluttered in the breeze which was blowing in theirfaces from the far-off sea. And when he saw Lucy he gave such a start of surprise that hedropped all his parcels."Goodness gracious me!" exclaimed the Faun.CHAPTER II_What Lucy Found There_"Good evening," said Lucy. What aboutputting on some of these coats?""They're not ours," said Peter doubtfully."I am sure nobody would mind," said Susan. He rushes on and on, never missing his footing,never hesitating, threading his way with perfect skill betweentree-trunks, jumping over bush and briar and the smaller streams,wading the larger, swimming the largest of all. The mostpleased of the lot was the other lion, who kept running abouteverywhere pretending to be very busy but really in order to say toeveryone he met, "Did you hear what he said? His blood is my property.""Come and take it then," said the Bull with the man's head in a greatbellowing voice."Fool," said the Witch with a savage smile that was almost a snarl, "doyou really think your master can rob me of my rights by mere force? One of the Sons of Adam killed him. Only fiveminutes later he noticed a dozen crocuses growing round the foot of anold tree--gold and purple and white. In fact they were allsitting up with their mouths and eyes wide open, listening to a soundwhich was the very sound they'd all been thinking of (and sometimesimagining they heard) during their walk last night. But before they had time to feel really awkward one of theleopards approached Aslan and said:"Sire, there is a messenger from the enemy who craves audience.""Let him approach," said Aslan.The leopard went away and soon returned leading the Witch's Dwarf."What is your message, Son of Earth?" asked Aslan."The Queen of Narnia and Empress of the Lone Islands desires a safeconduct to come and speak with you," said the Dwarf, "on a matter whichis as much to your advantage as to hers.""Queen of Narnia, indeed!" said Mr. Beaver. But behindhim, on a much higher seat in the middle of the sledge sat a verydifferent person--a great lady, taller than any woman that Edmund hadever seen. All round them, thoughout of sight, there were streams chattering, murmuring, bubbling,splashing and even (in the distance) roaring. Instead, the animal put its paw against its mouth just as humansput their finger on their lips when they are signalling to you to bequiet. He had a strange, but pleasant littleface with a short pointed beard and curly hair, and out of the hairthere stuck two horns, one on each side of his forehead. But he still wantedto taste that Turkish Delight again more than he wanted anything else."Who told you all that stuff about the White Witch?" he asked."Mr. Tumnus, the Faun," said Lucy."You can't always believe what Fauns say," said Edmund, trying to soundas if he knew far more about them than Lucy."Who said so?" asked Lucy."Everyone knows it," said Edmund, "ask anybody you like. He had just noticed a pieceof paper which had been nailed through the carpet to the floor."Is there anything written on it?" asked Susan."Yes, I think there is," answered Peter, "but I can't read it in thislight. I want a nice boy whom I couldbring up as a Prince and who would be King of Narnia when I am gone.While he was Prince he would wear a gold crown and eat Turkish Delightall day long; and you are much the cleverest and handsomest young manI've ever met. Beaverparticularly noticed this."You have a traitor there, Aslan," said the Witch. "Let him first be shaved."Another roar of mean laughter went up from her followers as an ogrewith a pair of shears came forward and squatted down by Aslan's head.Snip-snip-snip went the shears and masses of curling gold began to fallto the ground. If she had been pretending, she would have hidden fora reasonable time before coming out and telling her story.""But do you really mean, Sir," said Peter, "that there could be otherworlds--all over the place, just round the corner--like that?""Nothing is more probable," said the Professor, taking off hisspectacles and beginning to polish them, while he muttered to himself,"I wonder what they do teach them at these schools.""But what are we to do?" said Susan. They think it'll dosome good untying him."It was quite definitely lighter by now. Susan had aslight blister on one heel.They had left the course of the big river some time ago; for one had toturn a little to the right (that meant a little to the South) to reachthe place of the Stone Table. That pair were in the centre. Before twoo'clock they were on the march and set off in a North-Westerlydirection, walking at an easy pace for they had not far to go.During the first part of the journey Aslan explained to Peter his planof campaign. Infact every minute it grew both foggier and warmer. He lifted one of them and scratchedhimself. For you also are not to bein the battle.""Why, Sir," said Lucy. Always winter and never Christmas; think ofthat!""How awful!" said Lucy. We can'tjust leave him to be--to be--to have that done to him.""It's no good, Son of Adam," said Mr. Beaver, "no good _your_ trying,of all people. We haven't a moment to spare!""We'd better divide into four search parties," said Peter, "and all goin different directions. Across thethreshold lay a great wolf:"It's all right, it's all right," he kept saying to himself, "it's onlya stone wolf. It was very small so that whenthey all lay down they were all a bundle of fur and clothes together,and what with that and being warmed up by their long walk they werereally rather snug. Peter stood with his backto the others looking out at the distant sea. 