This industry, according to the classification of the Children's Employment Commission, comprises straw-hat makers, ladies'-hat makers, cap-makers, tailors, milliners and dressmakers, shirt-makers, corset-makers, glove-makers, shoemakers, besides many minor branches, such as the making of neck-ties, collars, &c. Modern Industry, as we have seen, sweeps away by techni- cal means the manufacturing division of labour, under which each man is bound hand and foot for life to a single detail- operation. The one he does on his own field, the other on the seignorial estate. On the one hand, therefore, manufacture either introduces division of labour into a process of production, or further devel- ops that division; on the other hand, it unites together handicrafts that were formerly separate. 3 It looks very like intentional misleading by statistics (which mislead- ing it would be possible to prove in detail in other cases too), when the Eng- lish factory legislation excludes from its operation the class of labourers last mentioned in the text, while the parliamentary returns expressly include in the category of factory operatives, not only engineers, mechanics, &c. l One thing is, however, requisite; this token must have an objective social validity of its own, and this the paper symbol acquires by its forced currency. If the slaves attempt any- thing against the masters, they are also to be executed. And when they haue wandered abrode tyll that be spent, what cant they then els doe but steale, and then iustly pardy be hanged, or els go about beggyng. Capital has its boundary of increase. But this contest at first takes place more between the large and the small landed proprietors, than be- tween capital and wage-labour; on the other hand, when the labour- ers are displaced by the instruments of labour, by sheep, horses, &c, in this case force is directly resorted to in the first instance as the prelude to the industrial revolution. 2 "Public Health. Hence raw material and auxiliary substances lose the char- acteristic form with which they are clothed on entering the labour- process. exchange for that quantity of capital which had been produced by the same amount of labour; antecedent labour would ... 31, 1863,'* p. c. may be substituted. The number of power-looms in worsted mills was, in 1850, 32,617; in 1856, 38,956; in 1862, 43,048. 503.) The same sort of hints in the 19th cen- tury. 4 1. 11. In the south of England certain landed proprietors and well-to-do farmers put their heads together and propounded ten questions as to the right interpretation of the poor-law of Elizabeth. Instead of the six hours that are sufficient for the latter purpose, the process may continue for twelve hours. ("Report of the Registrar-General." for October 1861.) 2 We, therefore, find, e.g., that in the beginning of 1863, 26 firms owning extensive potteries in Staffordshire, amongst others, Josiah Wedg- wood, & Sons, petition in a memorial for "some legislative enactment." Competition with other capitalists permits them no voluntary limitation of working-time for children, &c. The women who keep the "mis- tresses' houses" are themselves poor. The value of a thing consists solely in its relation to our wants. Is there any want there- fore of potters? showed, moreover, that while, with the described circumstances, infants perish under the neglect and mismanage- ment which their mothers' occupations imply, the mothers become to a grievous extent denaturalised towards their offspring — commonly not trou- bling themselves much at the death, and even sometimes ... The sale of the linen, G— M, is at the same time its purchase, M— G. c, ch. The steam-engine is the parent of manufacturing owns." (A. . All the value trans- ferred to those 4 lbs., from the raw material and instruments of labour consumed, was, so to say, intercepted in order to be incor- porated in the 16 lbs. on Saturday night, but more generally up to 4 or 5 o'clock, Sunday morning. An exact analysis of the process, there- fore, demands that we should, for a time, disregard all phenomena that hide the play of its inner mechanism. B. . In so far as the surplus-value, of which the additional capi- tal, No. 1, consists, is the result of the purchase of labour-power with part of the original capital, a purchase that conformed to the laws of the exchange of commodities, and that, from a legal stand- point, pre-supposes nothing beyond the free disposal, on the part of the labourer, of his own capacities, and on the part of the owner of money or commodities, of the values that belong to him; in so far as the additional capital, No. 2, &c, is the mere re- sult of No. 1, and, therefore, a consequence of the above condi- tions; in so far as each single transaction invariably conforms to the laws of the exchange of commodities, the capitalist buying labour- power, the labourer selling it, and we will assume at its real val- ue; in so far as all this is true, it is evident that the laws of ap- propriation or of private property, laws that are based on the pro- duction and circulation of commodities, become by their own inner and inexorable dialectic changed into their very opposite. The circulation becomes the great social retort into which every- thing is thrown, to come out again as a gold-crystal. For instance, if a flock of sheep has to be shorn, or a field of wheat to be cut and harvested, the quantity and qual- ity of the product depends on the work being begun and ended within a certain time. MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 379 there was an American machine for making paper cornets. m. The organisation of each group is based on division of labour, but the bond between the different groups is simple co-operation, which, by using in common one of the means of production, the furnace, causes it to be more economically con- sumed. of Insp. "They are so ill fed that assuredly among them there must be many cases of severe and injurious privation." 3 ("Pri- vation" of the capitalist all this! i.e., "abstinence" from paying for the means of subsistence absolutely necessary for the mere vegetation of his "hands.") The following table shows the conditions of nourishment of the above-named categories of purely town-dwelling workpeople, as compared with the minimum assumed by Dr. Smith, and with the food-allowance of the cotton operatives during the time of their greatest distress: Both ^exes Average weekly carbon Average weekly nitrogen Five in-door occupations Unemployed Lancashire Operatives Minimum quantity to be allowed to the* Lanca- shire Operatives, equal number oi' males and fe- males 28,87b grains 28,211 " 28,600 1,192 grains 1,295 " 1,330 1 "Public Health. Labour uses up its material factors, its subject and its in- struments, consumes them, and is therefore a process of consump- tion. m., to make every "young person," and "every child" begin, break off, resume, or end his 12 or 8 hours at any mo- ment they liked, and also permitted them to assign to dif- ferent persons, different times for meals, these gentlemen soon discovered a new "system of relays," by which the labour- horses were not changed at fixed stations, but were constantly re-harnessed at changing stations. c, p. m. In this class are included all means of production supplied by Nature without human assistance, such as land, wind, water, metals in situ, and timber in virgin forests. Therefore, the means of production can never add more value to the product than they themselves possess independently of the process in which they assist. 1865. is the great aim of some enterprising wholesale merchants. 356 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION producer of a commodity is bound to produce a use-value, to satisfy a particular social want, and while the extent of these wants dif- fers quantitatively, still there exists an inner relation which set- tles their proportions into a regular system, and that system one of spontaneous growth; and, on the other hand, the law of the val- ue of commodities ultimately determines how much of its dis- posable working-time society can expend on each particular class of commodities. But tailoring and weaving are, qualitatively, different kinds of labour. commanded that the same individuals should always carry on the same trade, for he knew that they who change their occupations become skilled in none; but that those who constantly stick to one occupation bring it to the highest perfection. 1860.-1.115,890,608 lbs. 55. But this was never allowed to go beyond the second reading, and the matter was thus protracted until at last the "great Liberal party," by an alliance with the Tories, found courage to turn against the very proletariat that had carried it into power. We have nothing to do with these in detail; we simply add them together, and the sum is a surplus-value of £3 lis. . The money in tKis case is money of account and serves to express the value of the com- modities by their prices, but is not, itself, in the shape of hard cash, confronted with them. The 'great pub- lic opinion" was, in fact, of Mr. Potter's opinion, that the factory operatives are part of the movable fittings of a factory. c, p. . With the keen eye of an expert, he has selected the means of production and the kind of labour-power best adapted to his particular trade, be it spinning, bootmaking, or any other kind. . it is alleged t^at miners are commonly worked on lease; that the duration of the lessee's interest (which in collieries is commonly for 21 years), is not so long that he should deem it worth his while to create good accommodation for his labourers, and for the tradespeople and others whom the work attracts; that even if he were disposed to act liberally in the matter, this disposition would commonly be defeated by his landlord's tendency to fix on him, as ground-rent, an exor- bitant additional charge for the privilege of having on the sur- face of the ground the decent and comfortable village which the labourers of the subterranean property ought to inhabit, and that prohibitory price (if not actual prohibition) equally excludes others who might desire to build. c, p -•i. 893.) 40 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION other. According to this view, a baker whose product lasts only a day, could never extract from his workpeople the same profit, as a machine maker whose products endure for 20 years and more. Is it not as salutary in surgery, as it is knowing in anatomy? If he must make two pairs in the same time, the productiveness of his labour must be doubled; and this cannot be done, except by an alteration in his tools or in his mode of working, or in both. In our example above, 24 pieces were produced in 12 hours, whilst the value of the product of the 12 hours was 6s., the daily value of the labour-power 3s , the price of the labour- hour 3d., and the wage for one piece 1-^-d. The two divide the total product in proportions deter- mined by contract. A simple geometrical illustration will make this clear. . E.g., the examination of 34 specimens of opium, purchased of as many different chemists in Lon- don, showed that 31 were adulterated with poppy heads, wheat-flour, gum. Here we must rather say, "Where equality exists there can be no gain." 4 It is true, commod- 1 "Mercier de la Riviere," 1. . . 1861," pp. Insp. 1852.-765,630,543 lbs. the lessee acts as if the whole colony were encamped, not resident." 1 "In pursuance of my instructions," says Dr. Stevens, "I vis- ited most of the large colliery villages in the Durham Union. It is not the articles made, but how they are made, and by what instru- ments, that enables us to distinguish different economic epochs. But over-time does exist for him, the prolongation of the working-day beyond the limits corresponding with the usual price of labour. c. 1,039,724 1,066,260 26,536 Potatoes, tons, 4.1 Turnips, . EXPROPRIATION OF AGRICULTURAL POPULATION 723 ants, the country clergy, who had to marry their masters' cast-off mistresses. MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 461 £7 4s. 2 Manufacture, in fact, produces the skill of the detail labourer, by reproducing, and systematically driving to an extreme within the workshop, the naturally developed differentiation of trades, which it found ready to hand in society at large. Dinner is only to last 1 hour, and the "afternoon-sleep of half an hour" is only allowed between the middle of May and the middle of August. In the latter case, the outlay of constant capital increases in proportion to the mass of labour set in action; in the former that increase is much smaller. The resources of the forest of Ben Aulder might give some idea of the loss sustained from the forced desolations. Potter, New York, 1841, pp. It is every bit as important, for a correct understanding of surplus-value, to conceive it as a mere congelation of surplus labour-time, as nothing but materialised surplus-labour, as it is, for a proper comprehension of value, to conceive it as a mere congelation of so many hours of labour, as nothing but materialised labour. In 1867, as consequence of a similar operation, there was a strike of 20,000 men at Preston. I, pp. He no more receives market-price for his work than does the soldier. The farmer complains ... 9.) "Over-working to a very considerable extent still prevails; and, in most instances, with that security against detection and punishment which the law itself affords. The same pieces of coin come into the seller's hand as the alienated form of the commodity and leave it as the absolutely alienable form of the commodity. . On the condition of town dwellings, I quote, as preliminary, a general remark of Dr. Simon. As regards the fluctuations of prices generally, they are subject to the laws of elementary relative value investigated in a former chapter. Since exchange-value is a definite social manner of expressing the amount of labour be- stowed upon an object, Nature has no more to do with it, than it has in fixing the course of exchange. One year'previously, in his "Outlines of Political Economy," written for the in- struction of Oxford students and cultivated Philistines, he had also "dis- covered, in opposition to Ricardo's determination of value by labour, that 230 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION SECTION 4.— SURPLUS-PRODUCE The portion of the product that represents the surplus-value, (one-tenth of the 20 lbs., or 2 lbs. If the additional capital employs the person who produced it, this producer must not only continue to augment the value of the original capital, but must buy back the fruits of his previous la- bour with more labour than they cost When viewed as a transaction between the capitalist class and the working-class, it makes no difference that additional labourers are employed by means of the unpaid labour of the previously employed labourers. What chiefly distinguishes a commodity from its owner is the fact, that it looks upon every other commodity as but the form of appearance of its own value. 40.) 1 Note to the 2nd Ed. Since 1866, when I wrote the above passages, a re-action has again set in. Sparks in "Positions to be examined concerning National Wealth," p. — I seize this opportunity of shortly answering an objection taken by a German paper in America, to my work, "Zur Kritik der Pol. The latter, indeed, gains adequate manifestation in the totality of its mani- fold, particular, concrete forms. The various operations that are per- formed in turns by the producer of a commodity, and coalesce one 1 This can be seen from W. Newnham (barrister-at-law): "A Review of the Evidence be- fore the Committee of the two Houses of Parliament on the Corn Laws." Lond., 1815, p. e., Sismondi), "De la Richesse Commerciale," Geneve, 1803, t. They were turned en masse into beggars, robbers, vagabonds, partly from inclination, in most cases from stress of circumstances. de Lavergne, according to which the English agricultural labourer gets only -7-, the capitalist (farmer) on the other hand — of the product * or of its value, apart from the ques- tion of how the booty is subsequently divided between the capi- talist, the landlord and others. Stuart Mill: "Essays on Some Unsettled Questions of Political Economy," Lond., 1844, p. Vivian: "Supposing that an enactment were passed preventing the employment of children under the age of 14, would it not be probable that . In Manufacture, the organisation of the social labour-process is purely subjective; it is a combination of detail labourers; in its machinery system, Modern Industry has a productive organism that is purely objective, in which the labourer becomes a mere appendage to an already existing material condition of produc- tion. 2 (3) The debasing 1 Moreover, it has not general historical validity. No less than -^ ths of this value, or 24s., 1 The calculations given in the text are intended merely as illustra- tions. It is only after men have raised themselves above the rank of animals, when therefore their labour has been to some extent socialised, that a state of things arises in which the surplus-labour of the one becomes a condition of exist- ence for the other. 165. Redgrave in "Reports of the Insp.of Fact., 30th April, I860," p. But so soon as the different oper- ations of a labour-process are disconnected the one from the other, and each fractional operation acquires in the hands of the detail labourer a suitable and peculiar form, alterations become neces- sary in the implements that previously served more than one pur- pose. The sum total of the labour of all these private in- dividuals forms the aggregate labour of society. The excavations are small and damp, and have no drains or privies about them, and not the slightest means of ventilation except up a hole pulled through the top, and used for a chimney. C'est par le moyen de ces services productifs, que nous acquerons tous les produits qui sont au monde. In the labour-process, therefore, man's activity, with the help of the instruments of labour, effects an alteration, designed from the commencement, in the material worked upon. a week; my wife works here also, and gets 5s. Once a function of capital, it acquires special characteristics. The enormous destruction of machinery that occurred in the English manufac- turing districts during the first 15 years of this century, chiefly caused by the employment of the power-loom, and known as the Luddite movement, gave the anti-jacobin governments of a Sid- mouth, aCastlereagh, and the like, a pretext for the most reaction- ary and forcible measures. This is the first step to which com- petition leads. 1 The new workwomen turn the machines by hand and foot, or by hand alone, sometimes sitting, sometimes standing, according to the weight, size, and special make of the machine, and expend a great deal of labour-power. in the University of Oxford.) "A History of Agriculture and Prices in England." Oxford, 1866, v. . Such is seed in agriculture. "It requires no further argument to prove that the educational clauses of the Factory Act, being held in such disfavour among mill-owners, tend in a great measure to exclude that class of children alike from the em- ployment and the benefit of education contemplated by this Act." a Horribly grotesque does this appear in print works, which are regulated by a special Act. Ainsi l'autorite dans l'atelier et celle dans la societe, par rapport a la division du travail, sent en raison inverse l'une de l'autre." (Karl Marx, "Misere", &c, pp. 2 1. One of its most finished creations was the workshop for the production of the instruments of labour themselves, including especially the complicated mechanical apparatus then already employed. 3 And subsequent sales, by other producers, unfollowed by purchases, merely bring about the distribution of the newly produced precious metals among all the owners of commodities. To accumulate, is to conquer the world of social wealth, to increase the mass of human beings exploited by him, and thus to extend both the direct and the indirect sway of the capitalist. Nevertheless, the capitalist may, for a moment, speak for himself. . The less value it gives up, so much the more productive it is, and so much the more its services approxi- mate to those of natural forces. It can almost be said that modern society lives at the expense of the proletarians, on what it keeps out of the remuneration of labour." (Sis- mondi: "Etudes, &c," t. These formulae, supple- mentary the one to the other, are rigorously definite and correct. Here, on the contrary, the change of relative magni- tude in the value of labour-power is the result of the change of absolute magnitude in surplus-value. * We therefore save ourselves a superfluous operation, and simplify our analysis, by the assumption, that the labour of the workman employed by the capitalist is unskilled average labour. They are seen standing in the various stages of nat- ural decay. But that one may be a commodity of any kind, coat, iron, corn, or anything else. by Sir. Without, however, anticipating the subsequent development of our inquiry, from the mere connexion of the historic facts before us, it follows: First. 1640.) "It is impossible to look at a question of this sort absolutely by itself?" (n. Now they reversed the medal. . . Where the capitalist has at his back the power of the mother-country, he tries to clear out of his way by force, the modes of production and appropriation, based on the independent labour of the producer. Here the factory system proper. The fact that half a day's labour is necessary to keep the labourer alive during 24 hours, does not in any way prevent him from working a whole day. Engels, 1. An office was set up in Manchester, to which lists were sent of those workpeople in the agricultural districts wanting employ- ment, and their names were registered in books. Neither can it any longer be regarded as the product of the labour of the joiner, the mason, the spinner, or of any other definite kind of productive labour. The raw material serves now merely as an absorbent of a definite quantity of labour. "Ignorance is the mother of industry as well as of superstition. One part he lays out in means of production. He dis- covered that capital is not a thing, but a social relation between persons, established by the instrumentality of things. they (the workmen) think that the verdict is not in accordance with the evidence given generally." (ns. Education of the masses, he urges, violates the first law of the division of labour, and with it "our whole social system would be proscribed." "Like all other divisions of labour," he says, "that between hand labour and head labour 4 is more pro- 1 A. But it is by the owner of the surplus-value, by the capitalist alone, that the division is made. In reality, the labourer belongs to capital before he has sold himself to capital. He, like all other buyers, seeks to get the greatest possible benefit out of the use-value of his commod- ity. If there is none, but all happens to be in coin, what then? p. .. There are others who, though they 'neither toil nor spin,' can yet command the produce of in- dustry, but who owe their exemption from labour solely to civili- sation and order . Wayland: "The Elements of Political Economy." Boston, 1843, p. In the period between 1799 and 1815 the increasing price of provisions led in PJngland to a nominal rise in wages, although CHANGES OF MAGNITUDE 529 the real wages, expressed in the necessaries of life, fell. Their ignorance and complete mis- understanding of facts 1 are worthily paralleled by the economists, who interpret the above phenomena of accumulation by saying that there are now too few, now too many wage-labourers. 1 1 1. "Granting," says Chapelier, the reporter of the Select Committee on this law, "that wages ought to be a little higher than they are, ... a., whether the same 6 millions (gold)... 23. Just as, with time- wages, it does not matter whether we assume that the labourer works 6 hours for himself and 6 hours for the capitalist, or half of every hour for himself, and the other half for the capitalist, so here it does not matter whether we say that each individual piece is half paid, and half unpaid for, or that the price of 12 pieces is the equivalent only of the value of the labour-power, whilst in the other 12 pieces surplus-value is incorporated. On the whole, however, the early English economists sided with Bacon and Hobbes as their philosophers; while, at a later period, the philosopher xcu'e$oxV)v f Political Economy in England, France, and Italy, was Locke. Those who are on day- work work 5 days of 12, and 1 day of 18 hours; those on night-work 5 nights of 12, and 1 of 6 hours in each week. 3. First, the main facts of the case. . From east to west— from the neighbour- hood of Aberdeen to the crags of Oban — you have now a contin- uous line of forests; while in other parts of the Highlands there are the new forests of Loch Archaig, Glengarry, Glenmoriston, &c. If we could succeed at a small expenditure of labour, in converting carbon into diamonds, their value might fall below that of bricks. of Insp. On the one hand, the enormous and ceaseless stream of men, year after year driven upon America, leaves behind a stationary sedi- ment in the east of the United States, the wave of immigration from Europe throwing men on the labour-market there more rapid- ly than the wave of emigration westwards can wash them away. c.) How very "skilful" is this "anatomico-physiological method" of Political Economy, which, "indeed," converts a mere desire "after all" into a source of value. The religious reflex of the real world can, in any case, only then finally vanish, when the practical relations of every-day life offer to man none but perfectly intelligible and reasonable rela- tions with regard to his fellowmen and to Nature, 80 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION The life-process of society, which is based on the process of material production, does not strip off its mystical veil until it is treated as production by freely associated men, and is con- sciously regulated by them in accordance with a settled plan. The value that he preserves in the product is directly proportional to the new value that he adds to the product. 2 John Stuart Mill, in his "Principles of Political Economy," says: "The really exhausting and the really repulsive labours instead of being bet- ter paid than others, are almost invariably paid the worst of all... 2 1. If the old cotton had never been spun, it could, after the rise, be resold at a shilling a pound instead of at sixpence. The women now had sufficient leisure to give their infants the breast, instead of poisoning them with "Godfrey's cordial." They had time to learn to cook. . of Insp. The doubling spindles, too, are no longer included in the spinning spindles (as was the case in the "Returns" of 1839, 1850, and 1856); further, in the case of woollen mills, the number of "gigs" is added, a distinc- tion made between jute and hemp mills on the one hand and flax mills on the other, and finally stocking-weaving is for the first time inserted in the report. in some instances it amounts 1 1 to 15 hours, from 5— a. The necessary labour which the Wallachian peasant does for his own maintenance is distinctly marked off from his surplus-labour on behalf of the Boyard. to 12s. Either equivalents are exchanged, and then the labourer receives 6s. But since x black- ing, y silk, or z gold, &c, each represent the exchange-value of one quarter of wheat, x blacking, y silk, z gold, &c, must, as exchange-values, be replaceable by each other, or equal to each other. Tucker, a notable economist of his time, excused himself for meddling with the things of Mammon. has almost every where arrayed itself against labour ... 4 3d. If it develops a one-sided speciality into a perfection, at the expense of the whole of a man's working capacity, it also begins to make a speciality of the absence of all development. Courage failed the House of Commons. It is rather preserved; not by reason of any operation it under^ goes itself in the process; but because the article in which it originally exists, vanishes, it is true, but vanishes into some other article. 82, n. 2 Thus they still less dared to oppose a measure intended only to make the law of 1833 a reality. Suppose a machine to be worth £1,000, and to wear out in 1,000 days. m. Two wretched children were tending her, themselves looking as much in need of nursing as their mother. Just as the social productive power of labour that is developed by co-operation, appears to be the productive power of capital, so co-operation itself, contrasted with the process of production carried on by isolated independent labourers, or even by small em- 1 R. Senior") the English text has been altered in conformity with the 4th German edition. The surplus-value is his property; it has never belonged to any- one else. This is es- pecially the case where piece-wage predominates, and where loss of time in one part of the day or week can be made good by sub- sequent over-time, or by night-work, a process which brutalises the adult workman, and ruins his wife and children. But since, on your assumption, his wages, and the surplus-value he yields, are of equal value, it is clear that he produces his wages 3 3 in 5-7- hours, and your net profit in the other 5^- hours. In England, perhaps, the labourer has not 2 /.." ("The Advantages of the East India Trade, &c," p. We Christians, however, hold them in such honour, that we fairly worship them for the sake of their money ... Such a revolution, however, alters only the quantitative relation between the con- stant and the variable capital, or the proportions in which the total capital is split up into its constant and variable constituents; it has not in the least degree affected the essential difference be- tween the two. Our first inquiry then is, how the in- struments of labour are converted from tools into machines, or what is the difference between a machine and the implements of a handicraft? The rule, that the labour-time expended on a commodity should not exceed that which is socially necessary for its production, appears, in the production of commodities generally, to be established by the mere effect of competition; since, to express ourselves superfi- cially, each single producer is obliged to sell his commodity at its market-price. Comm. Hence a sale leads to many purchases of various arti- 1 As before remarked, the actual producer of gold or silver forms an exception. m. In this there is nothing wonderful, for, says Adam Smith, "after these (profits) are diminished, stock may not only continue to increase, but to increase much faster than before. This would only be the case, if the primitive forest exploited him, instead of being exploited by him As far as his health is concerned, such a man would well bear comparison, not only with the modern proletarian, but also with the syphilitic and scrofulous upper classes. The original capital has now changed from C to C', from £500 to £590. c, pp. . Sometimes we get a little milk as it may be. This subjective principle of the division of labour no longer exists in production by machin- ery. So far as it is a value in use, there is nothing mysterious about it, whether we consider it from the point of view that by its properties it is capable of satisfying human wants, or from the point that those properties are the product of human labour. W. On the side of material, as it functions in the process of production, all capital is divided into means of production and living labour-power. That a capitalist should command on the field of production, is now as indispensa- ble as that a general should command on the field of battle. the labouring class compose the bulk of the people." 1 Nay, the impulse to self- expropriation, on the part of labouring humanity, for the glory of capital, exists so little, that slavery, according to Wakefield himself, is the sole natural basis of Colonial wealth. Wakefield— says: "The peasant of the South of England ... the difference in the wages of skilful and common labour is far less now than at any former pe- riod." 2 How little the increased intensity and extension of labour through piece-wages benefited the agricultural proletariat, the fol- lowing passage borrowed from a work on the side of the landlords and farmers shows: "By far the greater part of agricultural opera- French edition, Hume is not yet mentioned, whilst in the English, on the other hand, Petty hardly figures any longer. But along with this growth, there is at the same time developed in his breast, a Faustian con- flict between the passion for accumulation, and the desire for enjoyment. Each cottage held from 2 to 6 looms; some belonged to the weaver, some were bought on credit, some were hired. They extorted the privilege they de- sired. Total or Expanded form of value z Com. c, p. the rate of profits will generally be raised ... The continual oscillations in prices, their rising and falling, compensate each other, and reduce themselves to an average price, which is their hidden regulator. Silver and copper tokens take the place of gold in those regions of the circulation where coins pass from hand to hand most rapid- ly, and are subject to the maximum amount of wear and tear. This contrac- produire. A man lives here, in Wright's house, with his wife, her mother, and 5 children; the house has a front kitchen, scullery, bedroom over the front kitchen; front kitchen and bed- room, 12 feet 2 inches by 9 feet 5 inches; the whole ground floor, 21 feet 2 inches by 9 feet 5 inches. Neck- er, Paris and Lausanne, 1789, t. It would be useless to repeat here, with regard to the phenomenal form, what has been already worked out in the substantial form. 238. It was originally £500 and becomes £590. On the one hand, because the notion of "means of subsistence" would considerably expand, and the labourer would lay claim to an altogether different standard of life. Nevertheless, the compensation of a decrease in the number of labourers employed, or of the amount of variable capital advanced, by a rise in the rate of surplus-value, or by the lengthening of the working-day, has impassable limits. 368 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION the whole disposable working-time of the manufacturing labour- ers, that manufactures are short-lived, and change their locality from one country to another with the emigrating or immigrating workmen, these facts would speak volumes. — We find ourselves once more in a period of serious change in the relative values of gold and silver. The custom was for the master to clothe his apprentices and to feed and lodge them in an "apprentice house" near the factory; overseers were appoint- ed to see to the works, whose interest it was to work the children to the utmost, because their pay was in proportion to the quantity of work that they could exact. These same mothers often make them work at home, after school is over, till 10, 11, and 12 o'clock at night. Empl. Children and young persons are at present worse treated, and harder worked than at any previous period (n. Potter in a letter to the Times of March 24th, 1863. Nothing is more characteristic of the spirit of capital than the history of the English Factory Acts from 1833 to 1864. Torrens: "An Essay on the External Corn Trade." Lond. "A deadly lassitude, a hopeless surrendering up to filth," reigns in Gamblingay. 1 Such quantitative determination of its relative value takes bol; the article counts not for what it is, but for what it is worth." (Hegel, 1. 430 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION workpeople more productive. The evidence proves that boys and girls very often work over-time, which, not unfrequently, extends to 24 or even 36 hours of uninterrupted toil. And as equivalent of the linen in the value equation, it exists under this aspect alone, counts therefore as embodied value, as a body that is value. "He feels clear," says Dr. 1 "In no particular have the rights of persons been so avowedly and shamefully sacrificed to the rights of proper ty as in regard to the lodging of the labouring class. 67.) West is the author of the anonymous "Essay on the Application of Capita] to Land. (504 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION General result: by incorporating with itself the two primary creators of wealth, labour-power and the land, capital acquires a power of expansion that permits it to augment the elements of its accumulation beyond the limits apparently fixed by its own magnitude, or by the value and the mass of the means of produc- tion, already produced, in which it has its being. There is now mate- rialised in this 20 lbs. It is otherwise in the colonies. As the value of labour is only an irrational expression for the value of labour-power, it follows, of course, that the value of la- bour must always be less than the value it produces, for the capi- talist always makes labour-power work longer than is necessary for the reproduction of its own value. ("Macmi Han's Magazine." Ilias Americana in nuce. Thus were the agricultural people, first forcibly expropriated from the soil, driven from their homes, turned into vagabonds, and then whipped, branded, tortured by laws grotesquely terri- ble, into the discipline necessary for the wage system. We get nothing (to eat) before we come to work. consists in such- a quantity of necessaries and comforts of life, as, from the nature of the climate, and the habits of the country, are necessary to support the labourer, and to enable him to rear such a family as may preserve, in the market, an un- diminished supply of labour." (R. Private property, as the antithesis to social, collective property, exists only where the means of labour and the external conditions of labour belong to private individuals. In the factory we have a lifeless mechanism independent of the workman, who becomes its mere living appendage. It was not long ere this credit-money, made by the bank itself, became the coin in which the Bank of England made its loans to the State, and paid, on account of the State, the interest on the public debt. Hence, pro- duction here is independent of that division of labour brought about, in Indian society as a whole, by means of the exchange of commodities. It is called the Factory. Smith: 1. 2 In England women are still occasionally used instead of horses for hauling canal boats, 3 because the labour required to produce horses and machines is an accurately known quantity, while that required to maintain the women of the surplus-population is below all calculation. "Gentlemen of the jury, no doubt the throat of this commercial traveller has been cut. That which appears in these fluctuations of wages within a single country as a series of varying combinations, may appear in differ- ent countries as contemporaneous difference of national wages. On the other hand, it is evident that the duration of the sur- plus-labour is given, when the length of the working-day, and the value of labour-power, are given. have nothing to stir them up to be serviceable but their wants which it is 1 Karl Marx, I. . For 1872 we find, in round numbers, an increase of 2,b00 horses, 80,000 horned cattle, 68,609 sheep, and a decrease of 236,000 pigs.] Table D INCOMES IN POUNDS STERLING 1862 1863 1864 1865 13,398,938 2,937,899 4,858,800 23,597,574 13,494,091 2,938,823 4,846,497 23,658,631 13,470,700 2,930,874 4,546,147 23,236,298 13,801,616 2,946,072 4,850,199 23,930,340' 1 Tenth Report of the Commissioners of Inland Revenue. m. 2 In manufacture proper, he says, the division of labour appears to be greater, because "those employed in every different branch of the work can often be collected into the same workhouse, and placed at once under the view of the spectator. In the mixing, scribbling and carding rooms, the dust and dirt which are disengaged, irritate the air passages, and give rise to cough and difficulty of breathing. It soon 1 "Labour the exclusive standard of value ... Mr. A. Courcelle-Seneuil. 140, &c. of yarn, the value transferred from the cotton is six times as great as before. That this one-sided character of the money's motion arises out of the two-sided character of the commodity's motion, is a circumstance that is veiled over. In fact, ce n'est que le premier pas qui coute. V. The product, therefore, of individ- ual consumption, is the consumer himself, the result of productive consumption, is a product distinct from the consumer. 212 CHAPTER IX THE RATE OF SURPLUS-VALUE SECTION 1.— THE DEGREE OF EXPLOITATION OF LABOUR-POWER The surplus-value generated in the process of production by G, the capital advanced, or in other words, the self-expansion of the value of the capital C, presents itself for our consideration, in the first place, as a surplus, as the amount by which the value of the product exceeds the value of its constituent elements. Were these two objects not qualitatively different, not produced respectively by labour of different quality, they could not stand to each other in the relation of commodities. In 1864 there were in that country 1,800 of these mills. 10. If a self-acting mule is the implement 196 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION in general use for spinning, it would be absurd to supply the spinner with a distaff and spinning wheel. His "Essays" are a cookery book with receipts of all kinds for replacing by somesuccedaneum the ordinary dear food of the labourer. So was it also with the corvee, e.g., in the Danubian Prin- cipalities (now Roumania). But it is on tjiis very basis that he sells his labour and that his labour is wage-labour. For the first time, legislation saw itself compelled to control directly and officially the labour of adults. Comm. The Emperor Charles VI., on 9th Feb., 1719, renewed the edict of r685, and not till 1765 was its use openly allowed in the Electorate of Saxony. Therefore her depopulation must go yet further, that thus she may fulfil her true destiny, that of an English sheep-walk and cattle-pasture. If the market cannot stomach the whole quantity at the normal price of 2 shillings a yard, this proves that too great a portion of the total labour of the community has been expended in the form of weaving. Rep.," p. Our labouring people do this, and to all appearance are the hap- piest of all our labouring poor, l but the Dutch do this in manufactures, and appear to be a very happy people. Certain spheres of production demand, even at the very outset of capitalist production, a minimum of capital that is not as yet found in the hands of single individuals. There the capitalist regime everywhere comes into collision with the resistance of the producer, who, as owner of his own conditions of labour, employs that labour to enrich himself, instead of the capitalist. . With reference to the proposed alteration of the law, Mr. Ellis says: "I do not think it would be very objectionable to require that no person under the age of 18 should work more than 12 hours in the 24. Transformation of arable land into also a co-possessor of the common land. But no man of humanity could wish to see them constant and unremitted. While the value of the labour- power falls from 4 shillings to 3, i.e., by -7- or 25%, the surplus-value rises from 2 shillings to 3, i.e., by y or 50%. The condemnation of one part of the working-class to enforced idleness by the over-work of the other part, and the con- verse, becomes a means of enriching the individual capitalists, * and accelerates at the same time the production of the industrial reserve army on a scale corresponding with the advance of social accumulation. of Fact." MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 491 'This,' they naturally say, 'is an unjustice and loss to us, as it exhausts a portion of the boy's strength, of which we ought to have the full benefit.'" 1 Mr. J. Fanatically bent on making value ex- pand itself, he ruthlessly forces the human race to produce for pro- duction's sake; he thus forces the development of the productive powers of society, and creates those material conditions, which alone can form the real basis of a higher form of society, a society in which the full and free development of every individual forms the ruling principle. Since, before entering on the process, his own labour has already been alienated from himself by the sale of his SIMPLE REPRODUCTION 571 labour-power, has been appropriated by the capitalist and incor- porated with capital, it must, during the process, be realised in a product that does not belong to him. . c, Fourth Report, 63, p. Since, however, it is impossible, by circulation alone, to account for the conversion of money into capital, for the formation of sur- plus-value, it would appear, that merchants' capital is an impos- sibility, so long as equivalents are exchanged; 1 that, therefore, it can only have its origin in the two-fold advantage gained, over both the selling and the buying producers, by the merchant who parasitically shoves himself in between them. However narrow his own views may have been, yet, that he laid his finger on some serious defects in the Ricardian Theory, is proved by the animosity with which he was attacked by Ricardo's followers. Naylor & Vickers, steel manufacturers, who employ between 600 and 700 persons, among whom only 10 per cent, are under 18, and of those, only 20 boys under 18 work in night sets, thus express themselves: "The boys do not suffer from the heat. this "very intelligent gentleman" then wrote a letter 1 in the Glas- gow Daily Mail of April 25th, 1849, with the title, "The relay sys- tem," in which among other things the following grotesquely naive passage occurs: "Let us now. In many places the self-acting minders ranged from 5s. Nevertheless, an increased quantity of material wealth may correspond to a simultaneous fall in the mag- nitude of its value. of yarn, or the price of one pound is eighteenpence. to each, a workman of appropriate value and cost was naturally assigned, forms the very essence of division of labour." On the other hand, he describes this division as "adaptation of labour to the different talents of men," and lastly, characterises the whole manufacturing system as "a system for the division or gradation of labour," as "the division of labour into degrees of skill," &c (Ure, I. The latter thereupon turned in their extremity to the operatives, urs^ed them earnestly to agitate for the 9 hours' system, and promised contributions in money to this end. . It is the agri- culture of the West Indies, which has been for centuries prolific of fabulous wealth, that has engulfed millions of the African race. 40.) 2 "Exchanges rise and fall every week, and at some particular times in the year run high against a nation, and at other times run as high on the contrary." (N. At present, only one quotation. Where Nature is too lavish, she "keeps him in hand, like a child in leading-strings." She does not impose upon him any necessity to develop himself. Ac- cording to Mr. Baynes, 2|- operatives are required for the 450 mule spindles, inclusive of preparation machinery, x that are driven by one-horse power; each self-acting mule spindle, working ten hours, produces 13 ounces of yarn (average number of thick- ness); consequently 2-f- operatives spin weekly 365 f- lbs. 1737.) "Can you see any difference in the circumstances of women em- ployed in ironworks, and the circumstances of women employed above ground in collieries?" "I have not ascertained anything as to that." (n. Knight: VVhat is the next sort that ye say would win by it? In the middle ages the contest ended with the ruin of the feudal pany, confirms the fact that in India silver ornaments still continue to per- form directly the functions of a hoard. This method of calculation serves the English manufacturer for every-day use; it shows, he will say, that in the 9 first 8 hours, or -« of the working-day, he gets back the value of his cotton; and so on for the remaining hours. THE ENGLISH FACTORY ACTS, 1833 TO 1864 After capital had taken centuries in extending the working- day to its normal maximum limit, and then beyond this to the limit of the natural day of 12 hours, 1 there followed on the birth of machinism and modern industry in the last third of the 18th century, a violent encroachment like that of an avalanche in its intensity and extent. Profane commodi- ties can no longer replace it. At the best, its construction employs fewer men than its employment displaces. 4 The economic development of the United States is itself a product of European, more especially of English modern industry. THE WORKING-DAY 243 It is evident that in this atmosphere the formation of surplus- value by surplus-labour, is no secret. des teinturiers, des encolleurs, puis des tisserands; mais its ne sont pas reunis dans un ineine etablissement, ne dependent pas d'un meme maitre; tons ils sont independants " (A. £1,000,000 Total, . On the other hand, it accomplishes this social organisation of the labour-process only by riveting each labourer to a single fractional detail. In such a case, he supplies himself with 1 "This is a remarkably peculiar property of productive labour. The agricultural revo- lution which commenced in the last third of the 15th century, and continued during almost the whole of the 16th (excepting, however, its last decade), enriched him just as speedily as it impoverished the mass of the agricultural people. "The Manufacturing Population of England," London, 1833, pp. ... there are other sources of accident which did not exist twenty years since; one especially, viz., the increased speed of the machinery. 1 Soon, however, this command over abnormal quantities of unpaid labour, i.e., quantities in ex- cess of the average social amount, becomes a source of competition amongst the capitalists themselves. this change has been effected by the taking of interest on capital .... the inhabitants of the country have lived from time immemorial The boundaries of the villages have been but seldom altered; and though the villages themselves have been sometimes injured, and even desolated by war, famine, and disease, the same name, the same limits, the same interests, and even the same families, have continued for ages. Yet this is the dogma of the economists. Dr. Julian Hunter was therefore commissioned to investigate this phenom- enon on the spot. The character of having value, when once impressed upon products, obtains fixity- only by reason of their acting and re-acting upon each other as quantities of value. The value-form of the product of labour is not only the most abstract, but is also the most universal form, taken by the product in bourgeois production, and stamps that production as a particular species of social production, and thereby gives it its special historical character. The fact that the production of use-values, or goods, is carried on under the control of a capitalist and on his behalf, does not alter the general character of that production. But in the text we deal with that wear and tear, which no doctor can cure, and which little by little brings about death, with "that kind of wear which cannot be repaired from time to time, and which, in the case of a knife, would ultimately reduce it to a state in which the cut- ler would say of it, it is not worth a new blade." We have shewn in the text, that a machine takes part in every labour-process as an integral machine, but that into the simultaneous process of creating value it enters only bit by bit. m. For the shape assumed by its own value, for the universal equiva- lent. 1, 2, and preface, p. Hence, a relative decrease in the number of hands is consistent with an actual increase. B. Two years earlier, the same House of Commons and the same Mr. Gladstone in the well-known straightforward fashion brought in a bill for the abolition of all exceptional penal legis- lation against the working-class. 388 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION field of production is incomparably larger than that of a tool. We do not find the production at all interfered with; in short, we produce more in the same time." 1 It is evident that the English legislature, which certainly no one will venture to reproach with being overdosed with genius, has been led by experience to the conclusion that a simple compulsory law is sufficient to enact away all the so-called impediments, opposed by the nature of the process, to the restriction and regulation of the working-day. 285. 135. Ce travail de surveillance qui servirait peut-etre d'utile gymnastique a l'intelligertce, s'il n'etait pas trop prolonge, detruit a la longue, par son exces, et l'intelligence, et le corps meme." (G. Its apportionment in accordance with a definite social plan maintains the proper proportion between the different kinds of work to be done and the various wants of the community. by Robinson, ed. B. The tokens keep company with gold, to pa) frac- tional parts of the smallest gold coin; gold is, on the one hand, con- stantly pouring into retail circulation, and on the other hand is as constantly being thrown out again by being changed into tokens. . To all the different varieties of values in use there correspond as many different kinds of useful labour, classified according to the order, genus, species, and variety to which they belong in the social division of labour. These cottages are known as "hinds' houses." They are let to the la- bourers in consideration of certain feudal services, under a contract called "bondage," which, amongst other things, binds the labourer, during the time he is employed elsewhere, to leave some one, say his daughter, &c, to supply his place. c, p. All labour of a higher or more complicated character than average labour is expenditure of labour-power of a more costly kind, labour- power whose production has cost more lime and labour, and which therefore has a higher value, than unskilled or simple labour-power. 1,484 Bank of England Notes, 68,554 Gold, 28,089 Silver and Copper, . "It is the fact . Our rent is 9d. I., p. There is no creation of surplus-value. The mode of appropriation of the prod- ucts remains the same as before; it is in no way altered by the bargain we have mentioned. ' Let us now consider the residue of each of these products; it consists of the same unsubstantial reality in each, a mere con- gelation of homogeneous human labour, of labour-power expend- ed without regard to the mode of its expenditure. Not only have we here an increase in the productive power of the individual, by means of co-operation, but the creation of a new power, namely, the collective power of masses. The young people stolen, were thrown into the secret dungeons of Celebes, until they were ready for sending to the slave-ships. it might, &c, ... So far, we are still in the domain of simple co-operalion, which finds its materials ready to hand in the shape of men and things. 2 labourer. The circulation of commodities differs from the direct ex- change of products (barter), not only in form, but in substance. 36.) 3 "Ou bien, il faut consentir a dire qu'une valeur d un million en ar- gent vaut plus qu'une valeur egale en marchandises." (Le Trosne, 1. The concluding statement in this quotation refers exclusively to shoemaking. "And it is now expressly admitted that the practice exists in England from the desire of mill-owners to have their machinery at work for more than 10 hours a-day, to keep the children at work with male adults after all the young persons and women have left, and until 8.30 p. This they did in the sycophantic service of the crowned heads, support- ing the right of the latter to debase the coinage, during the whole of the mid- dle ages, by the traditions of the Roman Empire and the conceptions of money to be found in the Pandects "Qu'aucun puisse ni doive faire doute," says an apt scholar of theirs, Philip of Valois, in a decree of 1346, "que a nous et a notre majeste royale n'appartiennent seulement ... It has already been remarked above that the equivalent form of a commodity does not imply the determination of the magni- tude of its value. In order to enable one portion of a capital to expand its value by being converted into labour-power, it is necessary that another portion be converted into means of production. These exami- nations furnish valuable material in other connexions also. (See "An Inquiry into those Principles Respecting the Nature of Demand and the Necessity of Consumption, lately advocated by Mr. Malthus," &c Lond., 1821, p. . Thus, not only does the historically developed social pro- ductiveness of labour, but also its natural productiveness, appear- to be productiveness of the capital with which that labour is incorporated. c, p. In the trade in which it is being em- ployed, it must possess the average skill, handiness and quickness prevalent in that trade, and our capitalist took good care to buy labour-power of such normal goodness. is thus no longer in force in my district (Lancashire). . Their wages, he says, "were not more than enough for the absolute necessaries of life." Let us hear for a moment a defender of enclosures and an opponent of Dr. Price. The exchange of commodities of itself implies no other relations of dependence than those which result from its own nature. Now, whether such a machine be merely a reproduc- tion of a complicated manual implement, or a combination of various simple implements specialised by Manufacture, in either case, in the factory, i.e., in the workshop in which machin- ery alone is used, we meet again with simple co-operation; and, leaving the workman out of consideration for the moment, this cp-operation presents itself to us, in the first instance, as the conglomeration in one place of similar and simultaneously acting machines. It thus serves as a universal measure of value. . 2 Ferrand's Speech in the House of Commons, 27th April, 1863. Thus the law is not broken; on the contrary, it is merely enabled to operate continuously. The capitalist can now wring from the labourer a certain quantity of surplus-labour without allowing him the labour-time necessary for his own subsistence. and especially since the introduction of the new Poor Laws, begins again in the sixties, until it becomes finally epoch-making in 1872. used amounts to 15 lbs., which is con- verted, not into yarn, but into "devil's dust." Now, although this 15 lbs. In sixteen of the registration districts into which England 1 "Children's Employment Commission, Fifth Report," London, 1866, p. The factory hands, especially since 1838, had made the Ten Hours' Bill their economic, as they had made the Charter their political, election-cry. THE GENERAL LAW OP CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 705 C shows that the change of arable to pasture land must work yet more acutely in Ireland than in England. 1 In the Danubian Principalities the corvee was mixed up with rents in kind and other appurtenances of bondage, but it formed the most important tribute paid to the ruling class. . xvi. A little outside the vil- lage, a house whose "tenants dunged against the house-side," the lower 9 inches of the door eaten away through sheer rottenness; the doorway, a single opening closed at night by a few bricks, ingeniously pushed up after shutting and covered with some mat- ting. The inversion, therefore, of the order of succession, does not take us outside the sphere of the simple circulation of commodities, and we must rather look, whether there is in this simple circulation anything permitting an ex- pansion of the value that enters into circulation, and, consequent- ly, a creation of surplus-value. &c. l James I: Any one wandering about and begging is declared a rogue and a vagabond. This point coincides with the birth of capital itself. If this principle is rigidly adhered to, it follows that the value of labour depends on the quantity of labour employed in producing it — which is evidently absurd. "The improved method," called forth by the Act, "of making slip by pressure instead of by evaporation, sively into machines wrought by unskilled labour, and every day convinces us that we can produce a greater quantity than by the old method." ("Rep. But all was in vain. Hence want of employment. "Traite theonque et pratique des entreprises industrielles." 2nd ed. This diminution can never reach the point at which it would threaten the system itself. Rep. 17, I. which is the true Riches of a Nation, and not the money." (John Bellers: "Proposals for Raising a Colledge of Industry." Lond. These would then simply be more rapidly consumed. Evidence of the "full-priced" baker Cheeseman, p. Comm. "The nourishment ob- tained by the labourer himself," says Dr. E. For instance, the value of a pair of boots depends, not only on the cobbler's labour, but also on the value of the leather, wax, thread, &c. Sans doute, il vaut mieuxvoir perir bes accumulations de capitaux que des g6ne- THE MODERN THEORY OP COLONISATION 771 What is now, according to Wakefield, the consequence of this unfortunate state of things in the colonies? We must now return to this form under which value first appeared to us. And why should not the workpeople eat their dinner before 9 in the morning? Moreover, this character of being necessary conditions of social labour, a character that distinguishes them from the dispersed and relatively more costly means of production of isolated, independent labourers, or small masters, is acquired even when the numerous workmen assembled together do not assist one another, but merely work side by side. It is brought about by labour; but how? Two points characterise this kind of con- centration which grows directly out of, or rather is identical with, accumulation. 1 In this way, not only are the ex- penses of his reproduction considerably lessened, but at the same time his helpless dependence upon the factory as a whole, and therefore upon the capitalist, is rendered complete. of Insp. m. Or, why cannot private labour — labour for the account of private individuals — be treated as its opposite, immediate social labour? XV., p. m., ... Further, the fewer the processes the cotton has gone through, the more certain is this result. The agricultural labourer is therefore reduced to the minimum of wages, and always stands with one foot already in the swamp of pauperism. Further, the value of labour-power cannot fall, and conse- quently surplus-value cannot rise, without a rise in the produc- tiveness of labour. The sheep are driven from, and then the deer driven to, the naked hills, and then it is called a deer-forest. Way land, 1. c.,p. Dryden anticipated these gentry: "Fox full fraught in seeming sanctity, That feared an oath, but like the devil would lie, That look'd like Lent, and had the holy leer, And durst not sin! before he said his prayer!" 2 Rep., 31st Oct., 1856, p. 49 v. This [scheme approved by Eden] would give the people of property sufficient (but by no means too much) influence and authority over those who . C'est le mettre dans le vide de richesses, pour ue le laisser vivre qu'a votre volonte." (Colins, I. He wishes to receive as much labour as possible for as little money as possible. c, Vol. Or 5 hours and 40 minutes weekly, which multiplied by 50 working weeks in the year (allowing two for holidays and oc- casional stoppages) is equal to 27 working-days." 2 1 I only touch here and there on the period from the beginning of mod- ern industry in England to 1845. CONTRADICTIONS IN THE FORMULA OF CAPITAL 165 interest is money of money, so that of all modes of making a liv- ing, this is the most contrary to Nature." 1 In the course of our investigation, we shall find that both merchants' capital and interest-bearing capital are derivative forms, and at the same time it will become clear, why these two forms appear in the course of history before the modern standard form of capital. The same quantity of labour is also embodied in a piece of gold of the value of three shillings. Peat for firing costs Is, 6d. . He himself relates on p. 3 But if 1 "Silver and gold themselves (which we may call by the general name of bullion) are ... But not to anticipate, we will content ourselves with yet another example relating to the commodity-form. . 63.) The cotton trade preponderates in Lancashire. England and Wales . The prolongation of the working-day beyond the limits of the natural day, into the night, only acts as a palliative. All the capitalist cares for, is to reduce the labour- er's individual consumption as far as possible to what is strictly necessary, and he is far away from imitating those brutal South 1 Rossi would not declaim so emphatically against this, had he really penetrated the secret of "productive consumption." SIMPLE REPRODUCTION 573 Americans, who force their labourers to take the more substantial, rather than the less substantial, kind of food. And beyond all measure hopeless is the wish that persons thus circumstanced should ever in other respects aspire to that atmosphere of civilisation which has its essence in physical and moral cleanliness." 2 London takes the first place in over-crowded habitations, absolutely unfit for human beings. The wear and tear we put at 10%, or £1,000 yeary= £20 weekly. In a working-day of 10 hours with average labour the result is: necessary labour =3^ hours, and surplus-labour =6^. 89. The use of one and the same technical term in different senses is inconvenient, but in no science can it be altogether avoided. 1237.) "But you are not quite satisfied with the state of morality in the factories?" "No." (n. valeur per- manente, multipliante." (Sismondi: "Nouveaux Principes d'Econ. Suppose that in spinning cotton, the waste for every 115 lbs. To it gold and silver, when serving as money, did not represent a social relation between producers, but were natural objects with strange social properties. One house let for 8d. In his history of Henry VII., Bacon says: "Inclosures at that time (1489) began to be more frequent, whereby arable land (which could not be manured without people and families) was turned into pasture, which was easily rid by a few herdsmen; and tenancies for years, lives, and at will (whereupon much of the yeomanry lived) were turned into demesnes. G or=w Com. Commodities find their own value already completely represented, without any initiative on their part, in another commodity existing in company with them. the labour has increased within the last few years fully 10 per cent., owing to the increased speed of the machinerv in spinning. Assume the habitual working-day as 12 hours, the daily value of labour-power as 3s., the expression in money of a value that embodies 6 hours of labour. Were it true that the proportion between these two sorts of capital is the same at all times, and in all circumstances, then, indeed, it follows that the number of labourers employed is in proportion to the wealth of the state. A radical change in the mode of production in one sphere of industry involves a similar change in other spheres. The remnant of the aborigines flung on the sea-shore, tried to live by catching fish. The manifesto alludes, not without irony, to the fact, that the greatest profit-monger amongst the building masters, a certain Sir M. Fall, 87,337. E.] 3 "Machinery and labour are in constant competition." Ricardo, I. The more, therefore, capital increases by means of successive accumulations, the more does the sum of the value increase that is divided into consumption-fund and accumulation-fund. There is a physical relation between physical things. ... In the same way the irregularity caused by the motive power in mills that were put in motion by pushing and pulling a lever, led to the theory, and the application, of the fly-wheel, which afterwards plays so important a part in Modern Industry. 1638.) "In what respect?" "In a physical respect." (n. Cseteris paribus, the ratio of these parts determines the magnitude of the accumulation. 5 1 "Small farmers never employ gangs." "It is not on poor land, but on land which affords rent of from 40 to 50 shillings, that women and children are employed in the greatest numbers." (1. It is, of course, highly desirable in the eyes of the petit bourgeois, for whom the production of commodities is the nee plus ultra of human freedom and individual independence, that the inconveniences resulting from this character of commodities not being directly exchange- able, should be removed. The operating part of the boring machine is an immense drill driven by a steam-engine; without this ma- chine, on the other hand, the cylinders of large steam-engines and of hydraulic presses could not be made. With this the demand for labour fell, not only relatively, but absolutely. 1 From 1815 to 1825 no person- al estate of more than £1,000,000 came under the succession duty; from 1825 to 1855, however, 8 did; and 4 from 1856 to June, 1859, i.e., in 4 — years. The brilliancy of Aristotle's genius is shown by this alone, that he discovered, in the expression of the value of commodities, a relation of equality. (6.) Herefordshire This little county has suffered more from the "eviction- spirit" than any other in England. The latter categories are, with the exception of the stocking-weavers, exclusively town- dwellers. 2 "Employers of labour would not unnecessarily retain two sets of children under thirteen.... Now this idea, as far as it may affect the bravery of our troops, may be of some use; but the less the manufacturing poor have of it, certainly the better for themselves and for the State. 2 Circula- tion, or the exchange of commodities, begets no value. . But with the additional capital thus exported, a part of the "labour-fund" invented by God and Bentham is also exported. ix., n. m. He has, therefore, produced not only surplus-value, which we for the present regard as a fund to meet the private consumption of the capitalist, but he has also produced, before it flows back to him in the shape of wages, the fund out of which he himself is paid, the variable capital; and his employment lasts only so long as he con- tinues to reproduce this fund. THE WORKING-DAY 291 sometimes divided into from 12 to 14 categories, which them- selves constantly changed and rechanged their constituent parts. But as an actor during the whole course of the play be- longs to the stage, so the operatives, during 15 hours, belonged to the factory, without reckoning the time for going and coming. . all this falls under the idea of a tool; but the plough, which is drawn by animal power, and wind-mills, &c, must be classed among machines." (Wilhelm Schulz: "Die Bewegung der Produktion." Zurich, 1843, p. On these victims, consump- tion, which is purely a disease of baa air, feeds." Dr. Richardson: "Work and Over-work," in "Social Science Review," 18th July, 1863. of Fact.," April 30th, 1848, p. [Added in the 4th German edition. 62. In consequence of the first report of the Commission on the employment of children (1863) the same fate was shared by the manufacturers of all earthenwares (not merely pottery), lucifer-matches, percussion-caps, cartridges, carpets, fustian- cutting, and many processes included under the name of "finish- ing." In the year 1863 bleaching in the open air 4 and baking 1 Thus, e.g., E. From 1602 to 1734, he remarks, they buried 150 millions of pounds sterling of silver, which originally came from America to Europe. Hence the principle, universally applied in this method of production, only to employ the rudest and heaviest imple- ments and such as are difficult to damage owing to their sheer clumsiness. I say "ul- timately," because average prices do not directly coincide with the values of commodities, as Adam Smith, Ricardo, and others believe. 1 Variable capital, it is true, only then loses its character of a value advanced out of the capitalist's funds, 2 when we view the process of capitalist production in the flow of its constant renewal. Among these 8 millions are: PERSONS, Agricultural labourers (including shep- herds, farm servants, and maidservants living in the houses of farmers), . He depicts the mass of the American people as well-to-do, independent, enterprising and comparatively cul- tured, whilst "the English agricultural labourer is a miserable wretch, a pauper. 79, § 174). materials supplied by Nature, in that case, there would be no constant capital to transfer to the product. On the basis of the same mode of social production, the division of capital into constant and va- riable differs in different branches of production, and within the same branch of production, too, this relation changes with changes in the technical conditions and in the social combinations of the processes of production. This phe- nomenal form, which makes the actual relation invisible, and, indeed, shows the direct opposite of that relation, forms the basis of all the juridical notions of both labourer and capitalist, of all the mystifications of the capitalistic mode of production, of all its illusions as to liberty, of all the apologetic shifts of the vul- gar economists. c, pp. 2 I. Bruxelles, 1837. m. is the daily value of one labour-power or the value of the capital advanced in the buying of one labour- power. One child sickened and died. 2 So, at the present time, in those branches of the lace manufacture not yet subject to the Factory Act, it is maintained that the meal- times cannot be regular owing to the different periods required by the various kinds of lace for drying, which periods vary from three minutes up to an hour and more. None are included in the 1,208,648 who do not serve in private houses. Suppose that a capitalist pays for a day's labour-power at its value; then the right to use that power for a day belongs to him, just as much as the right to use any other commodity, such as a horse that he has hired for the day. 15, MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 433 child can superintend it." 1 "On the automatic plan skilled la- bour gets progressively superseded". America, whose daily task (the heaviest perhaps in the world) consists in bringing to the surface on their shoulders a load of metal weighing from 180 to 200 pounds, fro:n a depth of 450 feet, live on bread and beans only; they themselves would prefer the bread alone for food, but their masters, who have found out that the men cannot work so hard on bread, treat them like horses, and compel them to eat beans; beans, however, are relatively much richer in bone-earth (phos- phate of lime) than is bread." (Liebig, 1. 13.) 3 A purchase, in a "categorical" sense, implies that gold and silver are already the converted form of commodities, or the product of a sale. When, in 1871, Parliament withdrew from them this power, in order to confer it on the Factory Inspectors, to whose province it thus added by a single stroke more than one hundred thousand workshops, and three hundred brickworks, care was taken at the same time not to add more than eight assistants to their already undermanned staff. Say, who pretends to account for surplus-value (Interest, Profit, Rent), by the "services produc- tifs" which the means of production, soil, instruments, and raw material, render in the labour-process by means of their use-values. c. to 7 or 7.30 p. Its analysis, therefore, is our real difficulty. It can spring into life, only when the owner of the means of production and subsistence meets in the market with the free labourer selling his labour-power. Nothing of the kind. 308.) This was rather too much for the adherents of the old classical school. We pre-suppose labour in a form that stamps it as exclusively human. 588.) "Do not mining engineers possess a sort of public character, and do not you think that they are above making such a partial decision as you appre- hend?" "I do not wish to answer such a question as that with re- spect to the personal character of those men. Castes and guilds arise from the action of the same natural law, that regulates the differentiation of plants and animals into species and varieties, except that, when a certain degree of devel- opment has been reached, the heredity of castes and the exclu- siveness of guilds are ordained as a law of society. G. When this term is once reached, only a very small number continue to find employment in the same branches of industry, whilst the majority are regularly discharged. We, therefore, assume no more than what actually takes place. Ulm, 1860," and others. For the labour spent upon them counts effectively, only in so far as it is spent in a form that is useful for others. If now, the £110 be spent as money, they cease to play their part. If the productive power of all the different sorts of useful labour required for the production of a coat remains unchanged, the sum of the values of the coats produced increases with their number. But then, he has the modern wage-labourer in his eye. In England, for instance, we find the laws of ap- prenticeship, with their seven years' probation, in full force down to the end of the manufacturing period; and they are not thrown on one side till the advent of Modern Industry. One party to the contract sells his la- bour-power, the other buys it. Had he been a friend of the worthy ingenious Horrox he would have believed that the moon sometimes disappeared in a clear sky without the interposition of a cloud... "The dispossessed ten- ants either seek a subsistence in the neighbouring towns," &c. c, p. upper middle class was 38 years, while the average age at death of the labouring class 1 Whilst during the last six months of 1866, 80-90,000 working peo- ple in London were thrown out of work, the Factory Report for that same half year says: "It does not appear absolutely true to say that demand will always produce supply just at the moment when it is needed. Comm., IV. While, therefore, with reference to use-value, the labour con- tained in a commodity counts only qualitatively, with reference to value it counts only quantitatively, and must first be reduced to human labour pure and simple. THE WORKING-DAY 275 I must beg leave to differ in sentiment from those great politicians, who contend for the perpetual slavery of the work- ing people of this kingdom; they forget the vulgar adage, all work and no play. A society can no more cease to produce than it can cease to consume. 13,989 . All I fiat is solid melts into air, all that is holy is profaned, and man is at last com- MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 487 chemical processes and other methods, it is continually causing changes not only in the technical basis of production, but also in the functions of the labourer, and in the social combinations of the labour-process. c, p. 1071.) "But he can leave that place where the wrong has been committed?" "It is general; wher- ever he goes, he has to submit to it." (n. 4d., 3s. "The unpaid labour of the men was made the source whereby the competition was carried on." 2 And the "full-priced" baker denounces his underselling competitors to the Commission of Inquiry as thieves of foreign labour and adulterators. lxx., n. — "The Hansard version runs: 'Again, and yet more at large — what is human life, but, in the majority of cases, a struggle for existence.* The continual crying con- tradictions in Gladstone's Budget speeches of 1863 and 1864 were char- acterised by an English writer by the following quotation from Boileau: "Voila I'homme en effet. The consumption of labour-power is at one and the same time the production of commodities and of surplus-value. But the sum of the values of the commodities that entered into the process amounts to 27 shillings. But no repair, no improvement shall it receive, except such as its penniless occupants can sup- ply. per lb. If one fine morning the lord appropriates to himself the land, the cattle, the seed, in a word, the means of production of this peasant, the latter will thenceforth be obliged to sell his labour-power to the lord. the health of the workpeople was sacrificed, and the race in a few generations must have degenerated. . Capital cares nothing for the length of life of labour-power. When the same trans- actions are continually repeated between the same persons, the conditions of sale are regulated in accordance with the conditions of production. 2 The habit of doing only one thing converts him into a never fail- ing instrument, while his connexion with the whole mechanism compels him to work with the regularity of the parts of a ma- chine. 2 If the accumulation of capi- tal were to cause a rise of wages and an increase in the labourer's consumption, unaccompanied by increase in the consumption of labour-power by capital, the additional capital would be consumed unproductively. 3 Thus, among others, Philanthropist Ashworth to .Leonard Horner, in a disgusting Quaker letter. But even the product of labour itself has un- dergone a change in our hands. c, 64, p. 280. Along with the useful qualities of the products them- selves, we put out of sight both the useful character of the various kinds of labour embodied in them, and the concrete forms of that labour; there is nothing left but what is common to them all; all are reduced to one and the same sort of labour, human labour in the abstract. In the year 1865, the same factories contained, looms 95,163, spindles 7,025,031, had a steam-power of 28,925 horses, and a water-power of 1,445 horses, and employed 88,913 persons. It is the first authen- tic "History of Prices" of the time that we possess. idling part of the time, slaving the rest." (1. . The variations of the different factors may mutually compen- the circulating medium. Comm. 1 F. because the wages are so much lower." (N. for the shoemakers, and gave a total average of 9.9 lbs, per adult weekly. 2 Robert Somers: "Letters from the Highlands: or the Famine of 1847." London, 1848, pp. From that moment new forces and new passions spring up in the bosom of society; but the old social organ- isation fetters them and keeps them down. Consequently, we should have 20 yards of linen = l A coat. 1 ,669,267 yds. Such are air, virgin soil, uatural meadows, &c. The use-values of commodities furnish the material for a special study, that of the commercial knowledge of commodities. For the second time the Gaels were hunt- ed out. Anyhow, whether the coat be worn by the tailor or by his customer, in either case it operates as a use-value. Econ.," 3 Ed. Lond. AVERAGE WEEKLY COST PER HEAD Year ended. It is not the place, here, to go on to show how division of labour seizes upon, not only the economic, but every other sphere of society, and everywhere lays the founda- tion of that all engrossing system of specialising and sorting men, that development in a man of one single faculty at the expense of all other faculties, which caused A. 1 The years 1846-47 are epoch-making in the economic history of England. On the other hand, the average profits were low, and to accumulate, extreme parsi- mony was requisite. . One party of English economists, in the interest of capital, de- nounces this obstinacy in the most violent manner, another party defends the labourers. In the outside department of the factory, of the manu- factory, and of the warehouse, the so-called domestic workers, whose employment is at the best irregular, are entirely dependent for their raw material and their orders on the caprice of the cap- italist, who, in this industry, is not hampered by any regard for depreciation of his buildings and machinery, and risks nothing by a stoppage of work, but the skin of the worker himself. Regnault^s "Histoire politique el sociale des Principautes Danubiennes," Paris, 1855. "Cette facon d'imputer a une seule chose la valeur de plusieurs autres" (par exemple au lin la consom- mation du tisserand), "d'appliquer, pour ainsi dire, couche sur couche, plu- sieurs valeurs sur une seule, fait que celle-ci grossit d'autant.... While producing he consumes by his labour the means of production, and converts them into products with a higher value than that of the capital ad- vanced. c.) "Capital ... c. One of their first consequences was that in practice the working-day of the adult males in factories became subject to the same limitations, since in most processes of production the co-opera- tion of the children, young persons, and women is indispen- sable. 3 This is more the case in England than in France, and more in France than in Holland. For me the purchase from A and the sale to B are part of a series. . . But the value of a commodity measures the degree of its attraction for all other elements of material wealth, and therefore measures the social wealth of its owner. About 30 power-loom weavers, in the employment of one Harrup, a cloth manufacturer at Leower's Mill, Westbury Leigh, struck work because master Harrup indulged in the agreeable habit of making deductions from their wages for being late in the morning; 6d. The first fruit of the Civil War was the eight hours' agitation, that ran with the seven-leagued boots of the locomotive from the Atlantic to the Pacific, from New England to California. Report IV., 1865," p. m. 17 8 These are the net incomes after certain legally authorised abatements. The rest of the week's work was made up as follows: — Wednesday, 1 15 hours; Thursday, 15 hours 35 minutes; Friday, 14— hours; Saturday, 14 hours 10 minutes, making a total for the week of 88 hours 40 minutes. He must, according to law, human and divine, be comforted for his enforced "abstinence" over and above this by a thumping profit. Its real mode of existence in this sphere adequately corresponds to its ideal concept. 50-51. But its real purport is to prove that every seller brings his buyer to market with him. of yarn is made up as fol- lows: 30s. And does not this labour, too, create value?" His overlooker and his manager try to hide their smiles. 100, 101.) CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO CAPITAL 603 increases in the same proportion as the quantity of labour em- ployed. 720.) "Marked by whom?" "By his employers." (n. Say, "Lettres a M. These huts possessed no ventilation nor drainage, and, besides, were nec- essarily over-crowded, because each occupant had to accommodate lodgers, whatever the number in his own family might be, although there were only two rooms to each tenement. 4 Ure, 1. 8,227,807 Acres. m. DIVISION OP LABOUR AND MANUFACTURE 361 ist's workshop. Montagu Valpy describes it, is one of unmitigated slav- ery, socially, physically, morally, and spiritually What can be thought of a town which holds a public meeting to petition that the period of labour for men shall be diminished to eighteen hours a day? or 60 hours in any week; and that hereafter no minor shall be admitted as a worker under the age of 10 years in any factory within this State." State of New Jersey. Amongst a number of boys it will, of course, not unfrequently happen that one or more are from some cause absent. The unpaid part of the la- bour-price need not be reckoned in the price of the commodity. In the year 1850 there were employed in worsted mills 875,830 spindles; in 1856, 1,324,549 (increase 51.2%), and in 1862, 1,289,172 (decrease 2,7%). It is therefore impossible for capital to be produced by cir- culation, and it is equally impossible for it to originate apart 1 Aristotle, 1. a day would have to be em- ployed." (n. . v. Et ne quis possit emere aut vendere, nisi qui habet characterem aut nomen bestise, ^ut nume- rum nominis ejus." (Apocalypse.) Money is a crystal formed of necessity in the course of the exchanges, whereby different products of labour are practically equated to one another and thus by practice converted into com- modities. 2 These steam- 1 "The Industry of Nations," Lond., 1855, Part II., p. 38.) In many respects a book to be recom- mended. 68, n. A has converted his £40 into £50, has made more money out of less, and has converted his commodities into capital. 4 The sporadic use of machinery in the 17th cen- tury was of the greatest importance, because it supplied the great mathematicians of that time with a practical basis and stimulant to the creation of the science of mechanics. . In the latter, he belongs to himself, and performs his necessary vital functions outside the process of production. In country and town master and workmen stood close together socially. On the one hand, then, we assume that the capitalist sells at their value the commodities he has produced, without concerning 1. m. Nevertheless, when the producers of coats and boots compare those articles with linen, or, what is the same thing, with gold or silver, as the uni- versal equivalent, they express the relation between their own private labour and the collective labour of society in the same absurd form. l He and the owner of money meet in the market, and deal with each other as on the basis of equal rights, with this difference alone, that one is buyer, the other seller; both, therefore, equal in the eyes of the law. The capitalist, it is true, pays him in money, but this money is merely the transmuted form of the product of his labour. The latter weight, on the other hand, does not contain an atom either of the value of the auxiliary materials and implements, or of the value newly created in the process. 38, 39.) 1 Thus for instance, Balzac, who so thoroughly studied every shade ot avarice, represents the old usurer Gobseck as in his second childhood when he begins to heap up a hoard of commodities. There alone rule Freedom, Equality, Property and Bentham. 288,916 No. 176,368 Acres. Obstetricians who have passed parts of the night in such cabins have described how they found their feet sinking in the mud of the floor, and they were forced (easy task) to drill a hole through the wall to effect a little private respiration. 98. oi Insp. The manufacture is on account of its unhealthiness and unpleasantness in such bad odour that only the most miserable part of the labouring class, half-starved widows and so forth, deliver up their children to it, "the ragged, half-starved, untaught children." 3 Of the witnesses that Commissioner White examined (1863), 270 were under 18, 50 under 10, 10 only 8, and 5 only 6 years old. Let us now consider the total value of the product, the 10 lbs. The immense impetus it gives to the development of productive power, and to economy in the means of production, imposes on the work- man increased expenditure of labour in a given time, heightened tension of labour-power, and closer filling up of the pores of the working-day, or condensation of labour to a degree that is attain- able only within the limits of the shortened working-day. I., p. 406 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION to Professor Nassau W. 1 1 THIRD VILLAGE s. One of the most important pro- blems, therefore, which the owner of a factory has to solve, is to find out the maximum speed at which he can run, with a due regard to the above conditions. Proudhon's socialism is a working out of this Philis- tine Utopia, a form of socialism which, as I have elsewhere shown, does not possess even the merit of originality. The value of this product includes: first, the value of the used- up means of production. A thing can be a use-value, without having value. 96.) 2 Benjamin Franklin: Works, Vol. CO-OPERATION 333 This state of things is in no way altered by the fact that the capi- talist, instead of buying the labour-power of one man, buys that of 100, and enters into separate contracts with 100 unconnected men instead of with one. 9. Such extemporised wildernesses or deserts ought to be put down by the decided interference of the Legislature." 734 CHAPTER XXVIII BLOODY LEGISLATION AGAINST THE EXPROPRIATED, FROM THE END OF THE 15TH CENTURY. 7,826,332 . In the second phase, C— M, or the sale, the commodity is changed back again into money. A most atrocious instance had been brought before the Court of King's Bench two years before, in which a number of these boys, apprenticed by a parish in Lon- don to one manufacturer, had been transferred to another, and had been found by some benevolent persons in a state of absolute famine. Where Surat cotton was used, the loss to the operatives when on full time, amounted to 20, 30, and more per cent. Surplus-labour Surplus-value ., - mer. Hence the identity of sale and purchase implies that the commodity is useless, if, on being thrown into the alche- mistical retort of circulation, it does not come out again in the shape of money; if, in other words, it cannot be sold by its owner, and therefore be bought by the owner of the money. They are allotted respectively to the two different commodities brought into relation by that expression. 5 The 70 medical men, whom Dr. Hunter examined in that district, were "won- derfully in accord" on this point. 60. Finally, the use-value supplied by the labour- er to the capitalist is not, in fact, his labour-power, but its func- tion, some definite useful labour, the work of tailoring, shoemak- ing, spinning, &c. Labour? Before the rise of machin- ery, a manufacturer's evening expenditure at the public house where they all met, never exceeded sixpence for a glass of punch, and a penny for a screw of tobacco. "The quantity of coin in every country is regulated by the value of the commodities which are to be circulated by it.... On the basis of capitalist production, however, this necessary labour can form a part only of the working-day; the working-day itself can never be reduced to this minimum. employed in the details of the work." (1. If, e.g., the capital-value em- 7 1 ployed to-day in spinning is -x- constant and -5- variable, whilst at 1 1 the beginning of the 18th century it was — constant and -j varia- ble, on the other hand, the mass of raw material, instruments of labour, &c, that a certain quantity of spinning labour con^ sumes productively to-day, is many hundred times greater than at the beginning of the 18th century. But the area of the triangle itself is expressed by something totally different from its visible figure, namely, by half the product of the base into the altitude. The special advantages of this first period of fast and furious activity are felt in every branch of pro- duction that machinery invades. c), although in one case there certainly was "abuse of this system in respect to a number of girls and young women brought from the agricultural districts of Scotland into Lancashire and Cheshire." Under this system the manufacturer entered into a contract with the workhouse authorities for a certain period. "The miserable routine of endless drudg- ery and toil in which the same mechanical process is gone through over and over again, is like the labour of Sisyphus. 135.) The system of "open" and "closed" villages obtains in all the Midland counties and throughout the East of England. FORCING DOWN OF WAGES BY ACTS OF PARLIAMENT The proletariat created by the breaking up of the bands of feudal retainers and by the forcible expropriation of the people from the soil, this "free" proletariat could not possibly be absorbed by the nascent manufactures as fast as it was thrown upon the world. In order to get an idea of the horrors of this sphere, in which capital conducts its exploitation in the background of modern mechanical industry, one must go to the apparently quite idyllic trade of nail-making, l carried on in a few remote villages of England. A single person cannot carve a working-day of more than, say 12 hours, out of the natural day, but 100 men co-operating extend the working-day to 1,200 hours. The value of a day's labour-power amounts to 3 shillings, because on our assumption half a day's labour is embodied in that quantity of labour-power, i.e., because the means of subsistence that are daily required for the production of labour-power, cost half a day's labour. Mill, which are neither extensive nor profound, in the domain of Political Economy, will be found mustered in rank and file in his little work, "Some Unsettled Questions of Political Economy," which appeared in 1844. That which is now to be expropriated is no longer the labourer working for himself, but the capitalist exploiting many labourers. o si o £&2 S a, S *s *h rt~ 5o5 §^s $J=3£ gpjg s. The utility of a thing makes it a use-value. II., pp. For the operation of spinning, cotton and spindles are a necessity, but for making rifled cannon they would be of no use whatever. c, "A egalite d 'oppression des masses, plus un pays a de proletaires et plus il est riche." (Golins, "L'Economie Politique. 2 The rise of the nominal daily or weekly wages may therefore be accompanied by a price of labour that remains stationary or falls. 2 I must here remind the reader that the categories, "variable and con- stant capital," were first used by me. Beyond this he does absolutely nothing. The subordinate part which he assigns to machinery gave occasion in the early days of modern mechanical industry to the polemic of Lauder- dale, and, at a later period, to that of Ure. 31. The reason for this is not solely because their attention is entirely absorbed in the analysis of the magnitude of value. Yarn, linen, coarse woollen stuffs-- things whose raw materials had been within the reach of every peasant family, had been spun and woven by it for its own use — were now transformed into articles of manufac- ture, to which the country districts at once served for markets. 2 1. Hence it follows that in the labour-process the means of pro- duction transfer their value to the product only so far as along with their use-value they lose also their exchange-value. One of the clauses of this petition is as follows: "Your petitioners, as parents, con- ceive that an additional hour of leisure will tend more to demoralise the chil- THE RATE OF SURPLUS-VALUE 229 of the Oxford Professor. — is less than the value created by its use during that time. It is therefore in no way a relation between two magnitudes, independent one of the other: on the one hand, the magnitude of the capital; on the other, the number of the labouring population; it is rather, at bottom, only the relation between the unpaid and the paid labour of the same labouring population. Only, in the slave system, the advantage of a labour-power 1 Adam Smith only accidentally alludes to the variation ot the working- day when he is referring to piece-wages. Sir James Steuart, his son. The inanimate ma- chinery not only wears out and depreciates from day to day, but a great part of it becomes so quickly super-annuated, by con- stant technical progress, that it can be replaced with advantage by new machinery after a few months. Thus additional labour, begotten of the greater tension of labour-power, can augment surplus-product and surplus- value (i.e., the subject-matter of accumulation), without corre- sponding augmentation in the constant part of capital. We now turn to the factory as a whole, and that in its most perfect form. Danielson (Niko- lai — on) in his letter of November 28, 1878, the part of this paragraph which begins with the words "Strange optical illusion" and ends with the words "inherent necessity" should read as follows: "Mr. Mill is willing to con- cede that it is not absolutely necessary for it to be so, even under an eco- nomic system where the labourers and capitalists are separate classes." — Note by the Institute of Marxism-Leninism in the Russian edition. x., n. They conquered the field for capitalistic agri- culture, made the soil part and parcel of capital, and created for the town industries the necessary supply of a "free" and outlawed proletariat. 18.) A The "open-air bleachers" had evaded the law of 1860, by means of the lie that no women worked at it in the night. It is a very cheap sort of sentimentality which declares this method of determining the value of labour-power, a method prescribed by the very nature of the case, to be a brutal method, and which wails with Rossi that, "To comprehend capacity for labour (puissance de travail) at the same time that we make abstraction from the means of subsistence of the labourers during the process of production, is to comprehend a phantom (etre de raison). The two latter peculiarities of the equivalent form will become more intelligible if we go back to the great thinker who was the first to analyse so many forms, whether of thought, society, or Nature, and amongst them also the form of value. A 6d. Here is an instance. Their numbers have, in point of fact, increased by 100, but relatively, i.e., in pro- portion to the total capital advanced, they have diminished by 800, for the £2,000 capital would, in the old state of things, have employed 1,200 instead of 400 men. Hence the most vigorous polemic, in the economic literature of that time, on the "enclosure of commons." From the mass of materials that lie before me, I give a few extracts that will throw a strong light on the circumstances of the time. But, although boots are, in one sense, the basis of all social progress, and our capitalist is a de- cided "progressist," yet he does not manufacture boots for their own sake. of raw material to weigh 26 lbs. Nevertheless under this error lurked a presentiment that the money-form of an object is not an insep- arable part of that object, but is simply the form under which certain social relations manifest themselves. "Yet the total labour, that produced each single pair of stockings ... Hence it is natural that the lengthening of the working-day, which capital, from the middle of the 14th to the end of the 17th century, tries to impose by State-measures on adult labourers, approximately coincides with the shortening of the working- day which", in the second half of the 19th century, has here and there been effected by the State to prevent the coining of children's blood into capital. And this law only dealt with child-labour. c, Book II., ch. A commodity-owner is thus brought into contact with a possessor of money. They are natu- ral forces of social labour. Even in Cromwell's time, the building of a house within 4 miles of London was forbidden unless it was endowed with 4 acres of land. At the same period (1832) the total value added to the cotton by machinery and labour in the fine-spinning industry, amounted to about 33% of the value of the cotton. 4d., 3s. 39, n 58.) "If one man performs the work of two. Nevertheless, one commodity infects another through their common value-relation, so that their prices, expressed in gold or in silver, gradually settle down into the proportions determined by their comparative values, until finally the values of all commodities are estimated in terms of the new value of the metal that constitutes money. . 2 But our popu- lace have adopted a notion, that as Englishmen they enjoy a birthright privilege of being more free and independent than in any country in Europe. m. For example, the same amount of labour in favourable seasons is embodied in 8 bushels of corn, and in unfa- vourable, only in four. Their work is like slav- ery." 1 When women and their children work at home, which now-a-days means in a hired room, often in a garret, the state of things is, if possible, still worse. This mass is given technologically. In the London exhibition of 1862, 1 From the standpoint of division of labour in Manufacture, weaving was not simple, but, on the contrary, complicated manual labour; and con- sequently the power-loom is a machine that does very complicated work. In the preparation of these, it is added, scarcely a single article had been purchased, except the awl, needle, thimble, and a very few parts of the iron-work employed in the weaving. In so far then as labour is such specific productive activity, in so far as it is spinning, weaving, or forging, it raises, by mere con- tact, the means of production from the dead, makes them living factors of the labour-process, and combines with them to form the new products. * M — C, or purchase. Surplus-value, therefore, splits up into various parts. A carriage, for example, was formerly the product of the labour of a great number of independent artificers, such as wheelwrights, harness-makers, tailors, locksmiths, up- holsterers, turners, fringe-makers, glaziers, painters, polishers, gilders, &c. What he really intended to say was this: The manufacturer employs the workman for 11 l l 2 hours or for 23 half-hours daily. . Because, in the midst of all the acci- dental and ever fluctuating exchange-relations between the prod- ucts, the labour-time socially necessary for their production forcibly asserts itself like an over-riding law of Nature. .It forgets that the latter not only is the direct antithesis of the former, but absolutely grows on its tomb only. II., p. The Act of 1844 certainly prohibited the employment after 1 p. Of course, it may be said in one sense, that the labourer preserves old value always in proportion to the quantity of new value that he adds. B. c, p. The result was: "From 6th January to 20th April, 1844, with a twelve hours' day, average weekly wages of each hand 10s. * Leaving out of consideration such ready-made means of subsistence as fruits, in gathering which a man's own limbs serve as the instruments of his labour, the first thing of which the labourer possesses himself is not the sub- ject of labour but its instrument. The over- work of the employed part of the working-class swells the ranks of the reserve, whilst conversely the greater pressure that the latter by its competition exerts on the former, forces these to submit to over-work and to subjugation under the dictates of capital. THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 695 that children are generally only to be hired through his instru- mentality. Senior, "the most frightful picture of avarice, selfishness and cruelty on the part of masters and of parents, and of juvenile and infantile misery, degradation and destruction ever presented.... Lond., 1850, p. Each individual man's day is an aliquot part of the collective working-day, no matter whether the 12 men assist one another in their work, or whether the connex- ion between their operations consists merely in the fact, that the men are all working for the same capitalist. There is even no expedient for rolling up the warp; the loom must therefore be kept stretched to its full length, and becomes so inconveniently large, that it cannot be contained within the hut of the manufacturer, who is therefore compelled to ply his trade in the open air, where it is interrupted by every vicissitude of the weather." 2 It is only the special skill accumulated from generation to generation, and transmitted from father to son, that gives to the Hindu, as it does to the spider, this proficiency. It must be borne in mind, that we are now dealing with the production of commodities, and that, up to this point, we have only considered one aspect of the process. In order to 510 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION prolong the surplus-labour, the necessary labour is shortened by methods whereby the equivalent for the wages is produced in less time. The small amount thus earned is also often obliged to be spent in extra nourish- ment." ("Child. . — Doctor: I mean all those that live by buying and selling, for as they buy deare, they sell thereafter. We get tea once a week; at other times we get stirabout, sometimes of oat-meal, sometimes of Indian meal, as we are able to get it. ii., p. ... non-exchange ... Sturrock, superintendent of the machine department of the Great Northern Railway, says, with regard to the building of locomotives, &c: "Expensive English workmen are being less used every day. Vol. The competition among the master- 1 It a factory hand, e.g., refused to work the customary long hours, "he would very shortly be replaced by somebody who would work any length of time, and thus be thrown out of employment." ("Reports of inspectors of Fact.," 30th April, 1848, Evidence, p. 54, 55.) 4 "Ch. Empl. 114, n. Objects in themselves are external to man, and consequently alienable by him. And since we break on the wheel, and behead highwaymen, murderers and housebreakers, how much more ought we to break on the wheel and kill,... 2 "So much weight of cotton is delivered to him [the spinner], and he has to return by a certain time, in lieu of it, a given weight of twist or yarn, of a certain degree of fineness, and he is paid so much per pound for all that he so returns. How will its internal economy be cared for? Surplus-value arises from variable capital alone, and we saw that the amount of surplus-value depends on two factors, viz., the rate of surplus-value and the number of the workmen simultaneously employed. Certainly, this growth appears less important when we consider that in 1838 the hand-loom weavers with their families still numbered 800,000, 1 not to mention those thrown out of work in Asia, and on the Continent of Europe. After doing that, there is given to the owner 20 days to look over the matter; at the end of 20 days he has the power to refuse making any alteration in the mine; but, when he refuses, the mine-owner writes to the Home Secretary, at the same time nominating five engineers, and from those five engineers named by the mine- owner himself, the Home Secretary appoints one, I think, as ar- bitrator, or appoints arbitrators from them; now we think in that case the mine-owner virtually appoints his own arbitrator." (n. Labour-power itself is energy transferred to a human organism by means of nourishing matter. 224, n. After the conquest of Silesia he forced 732 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION The spoliation of the church's property, the fraudulent alien- ation of the State domains, the robbery of the common lands, the usurpation of feudal and clan property, and its transforma- tion into modern private property under circumstances of reck- the landlords to rebuild the huts, barns, etc., and to provide the peasants with cattle and implements. But at the same time it creates the material conditions for a higher synthesis in the future, viz., the union of agriculture and industry on the basis of the more perfected forms they have each acquired during their temporary separation. 2 Nevertheless the horse was extensive- 1 "The union of all these simple instruments, set in motion by a single motor, constitutes a machine." (Babbage, 1. It is only as expressions of such a unit that they are of the same denomination, and therefore commensu- rable. This suited the mode of explanation in favour during the 18th century. Despite this, they fell only in part. Hence, in order to keep the in- creased number of mechanics in constant employment, one carpet manufacturer after another must displace workmen by machines. c, p. This direct antagonism between the two comes out most strongly, whenever newly introduced machinery competes with handi- crafts or manufactures, handed down from former times. With very ac- curate appreciation of the state of things, the London labourers employed in the building trades declared, during the great strike and lock-out of 1860, 548 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION It is a fact generally known that, the longer the working- days, in any branch of industry, the lower are the wages. 2 Nevertheless, this density is more or less relative. there are ten persons .... . The number of labourers that find employment in them is directly proportional to the demand, created by those industries, for the crudest form of manual labour. As cottage accommodation could not be obtained for them all, huts were built in several places along the line of the works by the contractor, Mr. Jay, for their especial occupation. The process of circulation, therefore, does not, like direct barter of products, become extinguished upon the use-values changing places and hands. 2 If, on the one hand, the concentration of many machines in large manufactories leads to the use of steam power, on the other hand, the competition of steam with human muscles hastens on the concentration of work- people and machines in large factories. c, p. Without any re- gard to his holiness, Free-trade, the free baking-trade was there- fore placed under the supervision of the State inspectors (Close of the Parliamentary session of 1863), and by the same Act of Parliament, work from 9 in the evening to 5 in the morning was forbidden for journeymen bakers under 18. The one is peculiar to the object as such, the other is not, as a sandal which may be worn, and is also exchangeable. When, at the beginning of this chapter, we said, in common par- lance, that a commodity is both a use-value and an exchange- value, we were, accurately speaking, wrong. m., the manufacturers only had to give them no work till 2 in the afternoon; they could then keep them in the factory without intermission till 8.30 in the evening. The poor and idle are a necessary consequence of the rich and active," &c. of yarn. And yet those relations contain all that is essential to the determination of value. And it is clear as noon-day, that machines and systems of machinery, the characteristic instruments of labour of Modern Industry, are incomparably more loaded with value than the implements used in handicrafts and manufactures. 1 The "personnel" of this staff consisted of 2 inspectors, 2 assistant in- spectors and 41 sub-inspectors. He who converts his rev- enue abstains from the enjoyment which its expenditure would afford him. Tod' IxStoiaxet xai rcapaMaaaei cppsvcn; XpTpxdq Ttpo? 2 Steuart says: "If you compare the rent of these lauds" (he erroneously includes in this economic category the tribute of the taskmen to the clan- chief) "with the extent, it appears very small. 4 1. Therefore, some of the masters use the right which this fatal silence gives them to keep their works going, without inter- mission, day in, day out, possibly with the exception of Sunday. The soil under cultivation for wheat shows for the last 5 years the following stages of de- crease:-1868, 285,000 acres; 1869, 280,000; 1870, 259,000; 1871, 244,(XX); 1872 228,000. It is the old story: Abraham begat Isaac, Isaac begat Jacob, and so on. There the property-relation conceals the labour of the slave for himself; here the money-relation conceals the unrequited labour of the wage-labourer. The rent of H.'s house, Is. a week; one bedroom for man, wife, and 6 children. The peculiar conditions of the society in which he lived, alone prevented him from discovering what, "in truth," was at the bottom of this equality. During the revolt of the English factory lords between 1848 and 1850, "the head of one of the oldest and most respectable houses in the West of Scotland, Messrs. concept of value. a rent of £1 ,200 a year was recently offered, on the expiry of the existing lease this year, is to be converted into a deer-forest. The more the productiveness of labour increases, the more can the working-day be shortened; and the more the working-day is shortened, the more can the intensity of labour increase. Cammell & Co., are conducted on the same large scale as those of the above- mentioned John Brown & Co. The managing director had handed in his evidence to the Government Commissioner, Mr. White, in writing. From 1851-1861, the number of holdings of 15 to 30 acres increased 61,000, that of holdings over 30 acres, 109,000, whilst the total number of all farms fell 120,000, a fall, therefore, solely due to the suppression of farms under 15 acres— i.e., to their cen- tralisation. Wherever free labour is the rule, the laws regulate the mode of terminating this contract. c, pp. 53, seq. the greater the order and regularity of every work, the same must needs be done in less time, the labour must be less." ("The Advantages," &c, p. No sooner had Everet in 1758 erected the first wool-shearing machine that was driven by water-power, than it was set on fire by 100,000 people who had been thrown out of work. A system of machinery, whether it reposes on the mere co- operation of similar machines, as in weaving, or on a combination of different machines, as in spinning, constitutes in itself a huge automaton, whenever it is driven by a self-acting prime mover. Hence, when we bring the products of our labour into rela- tion with each other as values, it is not because we see in these articles the material receptacles of homogeneous human labour. 1 In order that these objects may enter into relation with each other as commodities, their guardians must place themselves in relation to one another, as persons whose will resides in those objects, and must behave in such a way that each does not appropriate the commodity of the other, and part with his own, except by means of an act done by mutual consent. The two-fold social character of the la- bour of the individual appears to him, when reflected in his brain, only under those forms which are impressed upon that labour in every-day practice by the exchange of products. to the increase of agricultural produce," 4 this dispropor- tion obtains much more for the last period, when a positive decrease of the agricultural population went hand in hand with increase of the area under cultivation, with more intensive cul- tivation, unheard-of accumulation of the capital incorporated with the soil, and devoted to its working, an augmentation in 1 The landed aristocracy advanced themselves to this end, of course per Parliament, funds from the State Treasury, at a very low rate of interest, which the farmers have to make good at a much higher rate. -VI. 2 "C'est, ajoutez-vous, grace a l'appropriation du sol et des capitaux que rhomme, qui n'a que ses bras, trouve de l'occupation, et se fait un revenu... They lived like misers, and were far from consuming even the interest on their capital. Locke asserts point blank the connex- ion between the absence of value in gold and silver, and the determination of their values by quantity alone. . He makes use of the mechanical, physical, and chemical prop- erties of some substances in order to make other substances subservient to his aims. The relation between it and the values of commodities is this, that the latter are ideally expressed in the same quantities of gold that are symbolically represented by the paper. c, p. A B G. Most of the children go without shoes and unclothed, for the air is so mild. Kincaid in "Reports, &c, 31st Oct., 1856," p. In France, as in Eng- land, the great feudal tt«rritories were divided Into innumerable small home- steads, but under conditions incomparably more unfavourable for the peo- ple. 203, 204.) My article was reprinted in a Scotch newspaper, and led to a pretty po- lemic between the latter and the sycophants of the Sutherlands. (3.) The absolute value of labour-power can change only in consequence of the reaction exercised by the prolongation of sur- plus-labour upon the wear and tear of labour-power. The former has nothing to do with the absolute length of the working-day, and may occur just as well in a working-day of 15, as of 6 hours. the gross. Of course the occupation must not be too severe, nor irksome, or unhealthy. 5 It is the work of a man ... The working-day is, therefore, deter- minable, but is, per se, indeterminate. It is only the value of the linen that is expressed. Classical Political Economy nearly touches the true relation of things, without, however, consciously formulating it. How now can the produc- tion of surplus-value be increased, i.e., how can the surplus-la- bour be prolonged, without, or independently of, any prolonga- tion of a c? La- bour has incorporated itself with its subject: the former is mate- rialised, the latter transformed. ii, pp. In order to express the relative value of the universal equivalent, we must rather reverse the form G. And as a matter of fact, the value also of each single yard is but the materialised form of the same definite and socially fixed quantity of homoge- neous human labour.* We see then, commodities are in love with money, but "the course of true love never did run smooth." The quantitative division of labour is brought about in exactly the same spon- taneous and accidental manner as its qualitative division. We are doing with fewer hands by 14, at a saving in wages of £10 a-week. It forms the general groundwork of the capitalist system, and the starting-point for the production of relative surplus-value. . Its annihilation, the transformation of the individualised and scattered means of production into so- cially concentrated ones, of the pigmy property of the many into the huge property of the few, the expropriation of the great mass of the people from the soil, from the means of subsistence, and from the means of labour, this fearful and painful expropriation of the mass of the people forms the prelude to the history of capi- tal. All new capital, to commence with, comes on the stage, that is, on the market, whether of com- modities, labour, or money, even in our days, in the shape of money that by a definite process has to be transformed into capital. It is only on this assumption that the various supplementary labour-processes can proceed uninterruptedly, simultaneously, and side by side. Owing to these relations with the markets of the world, the demand for labour increases in the carrying trades, which split up into numerous varieties. Its first function arises out of the conditions to which the currency of gold and silver coins is subject. But in every improved and civilised society, this is the state into which the labouring poor, that is, the great body of the people, must necessarily fall." 8 For preventing the complete deterioration of the great mass of the people by division of labour, A. Production and circulation of commodities can take place, although the great mass of the objects produced are intended for the immediate requirements of their producers, are not turned into commodities, and consequently social produc- tion is not yet by a long way dominated in its length and breadth by exchange-value. c, Fifth Report, p. are not trans- formed into capital, the basis of capitalist production vanishes. In the centre of a square surrounded by rows of cottages, an engine- house was built and the engine connected by shafts with the looms in the cottages. However, he was at last told they would give him another quarter, i.e., 10 d.," I. It is the production and reproduction of that means of production so indispensable to the capitalist: the labourer himself. He generally becomes as stupid and ignorant as it is pos- sible for a human creature to become." After describing the stu- pidity of the detail labourer he goes on: "The uniformity of his stationary life naturally corrupts the courage of his mind .... Hence that remarkable phenomenon in the history of Modern Industry, that machinery sweeps away every moral and natural restriction on the length of the working-day. 1 In the chapters on the production of surplus-value it was constantly pre-supposed that wages are at least equal to the value of labour-power. x The lowest sediment of the relative surplus-population finally dwells in the sphere of pauperism. Engels in "Lage, &.C.," points out the miserable condition of a large number of those who work on these very articles of luxury. 1 Ure, 1. In some places they are said to have been introduced at comparatively late dates; in others where gangs .... The general form of value, C, results from the joint action of the whole world of commodities, and from that alone. MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 435 NUMBER OF POWER-LOOMS. The farmers have discovered that women work steadily only under the direc- tion of men, but that women and children, once set going, im- petuously spend their life-force— as Fourier knew — while the adult male labourer is shrewd enough to economise his as much as he can. And, however small its absolute increase, in proportion to the dwindling population it had increased largely. He does individually, what the whole body of capitalists engaged in producing relative sur- 1 "A man's profit does not depend upon his command of the produce of other men's labour, but upon his command of labour itself. THE RATE OP SURPLUS-VALUE 219 the amount of surplus-value be given, we have only to deduct it from this remainder, to find the variable capital. c, pp. According to the "Reglement organique," as this code of the corvee is called, every Wallachian peasant owes to the so-called 1 That which follows refers to the situation in the Roumanian prov- inces before the change effected since the Crimean war. 5 After what has just been said, it will be understood that the Report of the Commission classes journeymen bakers among the short-lived labourers, who, having by good luck escaped the nor- mal decimation of the children of the working-class, rarely reach the age of 42. Redgrave in "Reports of Insp. and half an hour after 7 p. Here, as in natural science, is shown the correctness of the law discovered by Hegel (in his "Logic"), that merely quantitative differences beyond a certain point pass into qualitative changes. Not even timber-planting and real forest culture. 1736.) "You would be ob'liged to stop the employment of wom- en in the ironworks as well, would you not, if you stopped it in the collieries?" "I cannot speak for any other trade." (n. 1646). Hence, the productive power resulting from a combination of labours appears to be the productive power of capital. The usual working-hours are from 8 in the morning till eight in the evening, with 1-z- hours for meals, which are taken at irregular intervals, and often in the foul workrooms. In the middle, also, were little wicker-fenced spaces, like sheep pens, where in finer weather the 1 "Wholesale starvation of the London Poor. 1 1. Paris, 1844.) 76 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION to the establishment of their characters as values. The establishment and maintenance of a connexion between the isolated functions neces- sitates the incessant transport of the article from one hand to another, and from one process to another. 1803, vol. Work is no longer done with it, but upon it. 123.) "Would you call for the inter- ference of Parliament?" "I think that if anything effectual is to be done in the education of the colliers' children, it will have to be made compulsory by Act of Parliament." (n. The question I would put then is this — Is the trade worth retaining? Hence, concentration of large masses of the means of production in the hands of individual capitalists, is a material condition for the co-operation of wage-labour- ers, and the extent of the co-operation or the scale of production, depends on the extent of this concentration. 726 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION and many other families who were chiefly employed and sup- ported by them." 1 It was not only the land that lay waste, but often land cultivated either in common or held under a definite rent paid to the community, that was annexed by the neighbour- ing landlords under pretext of enclosure. It higgles over a meal-time, incorporat- ing it where possible with the process of production itself, so that food is given to the labourer as to a mere means of pro- duction, as coal is supplied to the boiler, grease and oil to the machinery. Where this was the case, the corvee rarely arose from serfdom; serfdom much more frequently on the other hand took origin from the corvee. x Even in the last decade of the 17th century, the yeomanry, the class of independent peasants, were more numerous than the class of farmers. In the above example, the value of the labour-power that functions through 12 hours is 3s., a value for the reproduction of which 6 hours are required. To simplify matters, we take no account of buildings, coal, &c. 2 This method of determining, from the standpoint of the labour- process alone, what is productive labour, is by no means directly applicable to the case of the capitalist process of production. If the men could insist on payment for over-work, this would be set right.... He pretends that in this way Turkey has been ruined, because "the owners and occupants of land have never been per- mitted by England to strengthen themselves by the formation of that natural alliance between the plough and the loom, the hammer and the harrow." ("The Slave Trade," p. To this had to be added the so-called jobagie, service due to the lord for ex- traordinary occasions. The external physical conditions fall into two great economic classes, (1) Natural wealth in means of subsistence, i.e., a fruitful soil, waters teeming with fish, &c, and (2), natural wealth in the in- struments of labour, such as waterfalls, navigable rivers, wood, metal, coal, &c. 134. 6, we see that certain cloth- makers took upon themselves to dictate, in their capacity of justices of the peace, the official tariff of wages in their own shops. 1 In its stead we have its value-shape— the money. of Insp. This is the place to return to one of the grand exploits of eco- nomic apologetics. The different national wages must be reckoned, therefore, as if that part of each that goes to the State in the form of taxes, came to the labourer himself. A product, though ready for immediate consumption, may yet serve as raw material for a further product, as grapes when they become the raw material for wine. If the total of the commodi- ties required daily for the production of labour-power = A, and those required weekly ==B, and those required quarterly = C, and so on, the daily average of these commodities =— — ' ^~ — i— m Suppose that in this mass of commodities requisite for the average day there are embodied 6 hours of social labour, then there is incorporated daily in labour-power half a day's average social 1 Petty. This process is accompanied by the continued increase in the quantity of the precious metals, an increase caused by their streaming in to replace the articles directly bartered for them at their sources of production. Polit.," t. i. Gregoir: "Les Typographes devant le Tribunal correctionnel de Bruxelles," Bruxelles, 1865, p. Just as commodities are, at the same time, use-values and values, so the process of pro* ducing them must be a labour-process, and at the same time, a process of creating value. Its life may be compared with that of a human being. . In many manual implements the distinction between man as mere motive power, and man as the workman or operator prop- erly so called, is brought into striking contrast. On the other hand, if we look at the workshop as a whole, we see the raw material in all the stages of its produc- tion at the same time. 30.) 2 On the means that the wording of this Act afforded tor its violation cf. But all methods for raising the social productive power of labour that are developed on this basis, are at the same time methods for the increased production of surplus- value or surplus-product, which in its turn is the formative element of accumulation. a man could not earn more than 8s. . — 'Ex 8tj tootcdv tcXsiu> te fxaara YifvsTai xat xdXXiov xai paov, otav zl$ fv xa?a cpomv xai iv xatpi axoX-rjv tuiv aXXu>v af<ov, rcparq)." (Rep. 3 On the other hand, the extension of the working-time pro- duces, in its turn, a fall in the price of labour, and with this a fall in the day's or week's wages. 2 This incessant reproduction, this perpetuation of the labourer, is the sine qua non of capitalist production. of yarn: this represents the value of the instruments of labour that are consumed in 12 hours. 3 1. 1, p. This nature itself is not to be deduced from the principle of utility. 348 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION system on its own foundation. 1 This revolution, which began in Scotland after the last rising of the followers of the Pretender, can be followed through its first phases in the writings of Sir James Steuart 2 and James Anderson. Whence arose the illu- sions of the monetary system? In truth, my first act, the purchase, was from the standpoint of A, a sale, and my second act, the sale, was from the standpoint of B, a purchase. 412 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION items, for one hour. So soon as this point is at last reached — and it takes many years — the hour has struck for the introduction of machinery, and for the thenceforth rapid con- version of the scattered domestic industries and also of manufac- tures into factory industries. Under their money-form all com- modities look alike. Here, however, the analogy ceases. August, 1863.) Thus, the bubble of Tory sympathy for the urban workers — by no means for the rural — has burst at last. Sir, to hold up to our view as 'perfectly wise and virtuous,' the character and conduct of one, who seems to have been possessed with an incurable antipathy to all that is called Religion; and who strained every nerve to explode, suppress and extirpate the spirit of it among men, that its very name, if he could effect it, might no more be had in remembrance?" (1. The effect is the same as 2 if these 6-^- lbs. 174) it was shown that in reality the labourer "ad- vances" to the capitalist and not the capitalist to the labourer.—/ 1 . Empl. Ferguson: "History of Civil Society." Edinburgh, 1767; Part iv, sect, ii., p. Just as there is a certain proportion of farthings necessary in a small retail trade, to change silver money, and to even such reckonings as cannot be ad- justed with the smallest silver pieces.... Both the process and its result, appear to be owing to this value. as soon as the working-day rises to 12 hours, to 2yd. What it reduced to bond- age in this case, was not the Dutchman, but the land for the Dutchman. This value is the surplus, of the total value of the prod- uct, over the portion of its value that is due to the means of pro- duction. Everything in the world that has been done wrong has been done wrong for the very best of reasons. Deer have received extended ranges, while men have been hunted within a narrower and still narrower circle. Rep. 5, 6.) Ft is Thunen's merit to have asked this question. The workman's continued repetition of the same simple act, and the concentra- tion of his attention on it, teach him by experience how to attain the desired effect with the minimum of exertion. Its value, like that of every other commodity, is already fixed before it goes into circulation, since a definite quantity of social labour has been spent upon it; but its use-value consists in the subsequent exercise of its force. 3 1 It appears paradoxical to assert, that uncaught fish, for instance, are a means of production in the fishing industry. B. Its production is in- cluded in that of the relative surplus-population, its necessity in theirs; along with the surplus-population, pauperism forms a con- dition of capitalist production, and of the capitalist development of wealth. In the parishes of Fingringhoe, South Farnbridge, Widford, Basilden, and Ramsden Crags, in 1851, 1,392 persons were living on 8,449 acres in 316 houses; in 1861, on the same area, 1,473 persons in 249 houses. This girl worked, on an average, 16^ hours, during the season often 30 hours, without a break, whilst her failing labour-power was revived by occasional supplies of sherry, port, or coffee. Econ. 1644.) "Is there a sufficiency of schools?"— "No" ... 2 We must never forget that even the serf was not only the owner, if but a tribute-paying owner, of the piece of land attached to his house, but 718 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION feudal production is characterised by division of the soil amongst the greatest possible number of sub-feudatories. Senior discovered at Manchester, that the profit (including interest) of capital is the product of the last hour of the twelve, he had announced to the world another discovery. and Charles XL Communal property — always distinct from the State prop- erty just dealt with — was an old Teutonic institution which lived on under cover of feudalism. 704 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION misery springs from absolute surplus-population, and that equi- librium is re-established by depopulation. of gold), £2 is the expression in money of the magnitude of the value of the quarter of wheat, or is its price. . Of every 1,000 persons employed there, 733 are men, 88 women, 135 boys, and 44 girls under 16; in the blast-furnaces, &c, of every 1,000, 668 are men, 149 women, 98 boys, and 85 girls under 16. 195. VALUE PRODUCED PER ACRE Seed, £1 90 Manure, 2 10 Wages, 3 10 Total, ... Four Justices sat, among them three cotton-spinners, at their head this same inevitable Eskrigge. These others, with respect to the former, play the passive parts of equivalents. Now, if the Factory Acts, owing to their compulsory provisions, indirectly hasten on the conversion of small workshops into factories, thus indirectly attacking the proprieta- ry rights of the smaller capitalists, and assuring a monopoly to the great ones, so, if it were made obligatory to provide the prop- er space for each workman in every workshop, thousands of small employers would, atone full swoop, be expropriated directly! The very root of the capitalist mode of production, i.e., the self- expansion of all capital, large or small, by means of the "free" purchase and consumption of labour-power, would be attacked. Oekonomie, 1859." In the estimation of that paper, my view that each special mode of production and the social relations corresponding to it, in short, that the economic structure of society, is the real basis on which the juridical and political superstructure is raised, and to which definite social forms of thought cor- respond; that the mode of production determines the character of the social, political, and intellectual life generally, all this is very true for our own times, in which material interests preponderate, but not for the middle ages, in which Catholicism, nor for Athens and Rome, where politics, reigned supreme. So e.g., "A Joint-stock company returns £6,000 as assessable profits, the surveyor raises the amount to £88,000, and upon that sum duty is ultimately paid. Lond. of linen = 1 coat, without altering its general character, and converting it from the expanded form of value into the general form of value. In the "categoric" sense the farmer is an industrial capitalist as much as the manufacturer. "Temperate living and constant em- ployment is the direct road, for the poor, to rational happiness" [by which he most probably means long working-days and little means of subsistence], "and to riches and strength for the state" (viz., for the landlords, capitalists, and their political dignitaries and agents). Unlimited exploitation of cheap labour- power is the sole foundation of their power to compete. Report of the Committee." Manchester, 1854, p. Hence, in such events, the form under which money appears is of no importance. ath-ra Imona ns per males. In some spheres a change in the composition of capital occurs without increase of its absolute magnitude, as a consequence of simple central- isation; in others the absolute growth of capital is connected with absolute diminution of its variable constituent, or of the labour- power absorbed by it; in others again, capital continues growing for a time on its given technical basis, and attracts additional labour-power in proportion to its increase, while at other times it undergoes organic change, and lessens its variable constituent; in all spheres, the increase of the variable part of capital, and therefore of the number of labourers employed by it, is always connected with violent fluctuations and transitory production of surplus-population, whether this takes the more striking form of the repulsion of labourers already employed, or the less evident but not less real form of the more difficult absorption of the addi- tional labouring population through the usual channels. 86, note.) In explanation it should he stated, that in Scotland, at the dateof Fullarton'swork, notes and not cheques were used to withdraw deposits. But the exchange of commodities is evidently an act characterised by a total abstraction from use-value. Up to a certain point, the increased wear and tear of labour-power, inseparable from a lengthened working-day, may be compensated by higher wages. The fiasco was, of course, as complete as that of Sir Robert Peel's Bank Act. The second step, the process of production, is complete so soon as the means of produc- tion have been converted into commodities whose value exceeds that of their component parts, and, therefore, contains the capital originally advanced, plus a surplus-value. Moreover, the breaking-up of surplus-value into fragments neither alters its nature nor the conditions under which it becomes an element of accumulation. 893.) CONSTANT CAPITAL AND VARIABLE CAPITAL 211 In the latter case we have an enormous increase in the constant capital, that is represented by the total value of the means of production used, and at the same time a great reduction in the variable capital, invested in labour-power. . This division was the result of concert and combination." 2 In one word: the mass of mankind expropriated itself in honour of the "accu- mulation of capital." Now, one would think, that this instinct of self-denying fanaticism would give itself full fling especially in the Colonies, where alone exist the men and conditions that could turn a social contract from a dream to a reality. 2 The increase of the means of production and subsistence, accompanied by a relative diminution in the number of labourers, causes an increased demand for labour in making canals, rocks, tunnels, bridges, and so on, works that can only bear fruit in the far future. Instead of the statistics of orphan asylums, &c, the declamations of the min- isterial journals in recommending dowries for the Royal children might also serve. of corn = I I / 1 a ton of iron = x commodity A = J 70 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION In passing from form A to form B, and from the latter to form C, the changes are fundamental. The fall in the val- ue of labour-power, caused by the disappearance or diminution of the expenses of apprenticeship, implies a direct increase of sur- plus-value for the benefit of capital; for everything that shortens the necessary labour-time required for the reproduction of labour- power, extends the domain of surplus-labour. The transition from one operation to another interrupts the flow of his labour, and cre- ates, so to say, gaps in his working-day .These gaps close up so soon as 1 "The arts also have ... Lond. Its function as a means of payment in the settling of international balances is its chief one. CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 371 PART IV.— (Continued) PRODUCTION OF RELATIVE SURPLUS-VALUE CHAPTER XV MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY SECT 19 N 1.— THE DEVELOPMENT OF MACHINERY John Stuart Mill says in his "Principles of Political Economy": "It is questionable if all the mechanical inventions yet made have lightened the day's toil of any human being." 1 That is, however, by no means the aim of the capitalistic application of machinery. c, p. — Every week this same paper has, under the sensational headings, "Fearful and fatal accidents," 254 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION In the last week of June, 1863, all the London daily papers published a paragraph with the "sensational" heading, "Death from simple over-work." It dealt with the death of the milli- ner, Mary Anne Walkley, 20 years of age, employed in a highly- respectable dressmaking establishment, exploited by a lady with the pleasant name of Elise. The simplest form of the circulation of commodities is C — M— C, the transformation of commodities into money, and the 1 The contrast between the power, based on the personal relations of dominion and servitude, that is conferred by landed property, and the imper- sonal power that is given by money, is well expressed by the two French proverbs, "Nulle terre sans seigneur," and "L'argent n'a pas de maitre" THE GENERAL FORMULA FOR CAPITAL 147 change of the money back again into commodities; or selling in order to buy. The military standard in Saxony was in 1780, 178 c. The improvements in the steam-engine have increased the piston speed, and at the same time have made it possible, by means of a greater economy of power, to drive with the same or even a smaller con- sumption of coal more machinery with the same engine. It is otherwise in the circulation M— C— M, which at first sight appears purposeless, because tautological. we get very differently, 6 hours surplus-labour Surplus-value of 3 sh. extended these regu- lations of labour also to weavers, spinners, and all possible cate- gories of workers. 3 Hence both product and producer are improved by division of labour. Since the demand for 3 ' 4 ' 5 ' 6 ' 8 labour is determined not by the amount of capital as a whole, but by its variable constituent alone, that demand falls progressively with the increase of the total capital, instead of, as previously assumed, rising in proportion to it. With very few exceptions, the general statement that no means are taken to secure the health of the inhabitants would be true of all of them. Comm. 1 "To an individual with a capital of £20,000, whose profits were £2,000 per annum, it would be a matter quite indifferent whether his capital would employ a 100 or 1,000 men, whether the commodity produced sold for £10,000 or £20,000, provided, in all cases, his profit were not diminished below £2,000. Paris, 1841, p. Say is pleased to call his doctrine and which he earnestly urges Mal- thus to teach at Hertford, as it is already taught 'dans plusieurs parties de l'Europe.' He says, ' Si vous trouvez une physionomie de paradoxe a toutes ces propositions, voyez les choses qu'elles expriment, et j'ose croire qu'elles vous paraitront fort simples et fort raisonnables.' Doubtless, and in conse- quence of the same process, they will appear everything else, except origi- nal." ("An Inquiry into those Principles Respecting the Nature of Demand, &c, " pp. Although in all branches of industry that part of the con- stant capital consisting of instruments of labour must be sufficient for a certain number of labourers (determined by the magni- tude of the undertaking), it by no means always necessarily 1 G. The capital given in ex- change for labour-power is converted into necessaries, by the con- sumption of which the muscles, nerves, bones, and brains of existing labourers are reproduced, and new labourers are begotten. to 9 p. In the year 1835 the 15,000 Gaels were already replaced by 131,000 sheep. The commodity to be exchanged may possibly be the product of some new kind of labour, that pretends to satisfy newly arisen requirements, or even to give rise itself to new requirements. 8 I. Of the 450,000 working-class families, over 200,000 are on the pauper list. — [Added in the 4th German edition. Useful labour becomes, therefore, a more or less abundant source of products, in proportion to the rise or fall of its productiveness. 709.) "You would still be prepared, would you," (flint-hearted fellow!) "to prevent their obtaining a livelihood by these means?" "I would." (n. x It is only the common product of all the detail labour- ers that becomes a commodity. It may therefore be imagined that all commodities can simultaneously have this character impressed upon them, just as it can be imagined that all Catholics can be popes together. xxxii., "The extension of the rail- way system is said to have contributed greatly to this custom of giving sudden orders, and the consequent hurry, neglect of meal-times, and late hours of the workpeople." (1. 253, 254. The following table shows the distribution of these incomes in the two years: Year ending April 5th, 1864. But the fact that it is v alone that varies, and the conditions of that varia- tion, are obscured by the circumstance that in consequence of the increase in the variable component of the capital, there is also an increase in the sum total of the advanced capital. That sooner or later, therefore, the capital and the workmen must come together again, and that, then, the compensation is complete. Besides the rivalry that this struggle begets in the application of improved machinery for replacing labour- power, and of new methods of production, there also comes a time in every industrial cycle, when a forcible reduction of wages be- neath the value of labour-power, is attempted for the purpose of cheapening commodities. IV. (London 1581.) The dialogue form of this work led people for a long time to ascribe it to Shakespeare, and even in 1751, it was published under his name. m. Further, wages after the war were higher than in the following century." (G. The capitalist paid to the labourer a value of 3 shillings, and the labourer gave him back an exact equivalent in the value of 3 shillings, added by him to the cotton: he gave him value for value. 46 sqq. 438 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION SECTION 6.— THE THEORY OF COMPENSATION AS REGARDS THE WORKPEOPLE DISPLACED BY MACHINERY James Mill, MacGulloch, Torrens, Senior, John Stuart Mill, and a whole series besides, of bourgeois political economists, insist that all machinery that displaces workmen, simultaneous- ly and necessarily sets free an amount of capital adequate to em- ploy the same identical workmen. 1 H. The antagonism of these two interests had been favourable to Factory legislation, while on the other hand the absence of that antagonism is sufficient to explain the delays and chicanery of the legislation on mines. 04 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 2. For the present, however, we have to consider the nature of value independently of this, its form. In a given country there take place every day at the same time, but in different localities, numerous one-sided metamor- phoses of commodities, or, in other words, numerous sales and nu- merous purchases. Similarly in the London furniture workshops, etc. 51, 52, 58, 59, 62, 70, of the Appendix. But in whatever proportion a given capi- tal breaks up into a constant and a variable part, whether the lat- ter is to the former as 1 : 2 or 1 : 10 or 1 : x, the law just laid down is not affected by this. In Europe, capital invests without hesitating a mo- ment, for the working-class constitutes its living appurtenance, always in excess, always at disposal. 22, n. Hence, with the in- crease in efficacy, extent and value of its means of production, con- sequently with the accumulation that accompanies the develop- ment of its productive power, labour keeps up and eternises an always increasing capital-value in a form ever new." 2 This natural 1 Friedrich Engels, "Lage der arbeitenden Klasse in England," p. This share is directly proportional to the cheap- ness of the product. In other countries it is found that tradesmen divide their attention between too many objects. . Hence Capital is reckless of the health or length of life of the labourer, unless under compulsion from society. The managers are, of course, English, as the native Russian capitalist is of no use in factory business. It is only in the markets of the world that money acquires to the full extent the character of the commodity whose bodily form is also the immediate social incarnation of human labour in the abstract. At the dawn of civilisation, it is the first class that turns the scale; at a higher stage of development, it is the second. The weaver has, as a matter of fact, exchanged his linen for a Bible, his own commodity for that of some one else. 8.) 1 Cf. Diodorus Siculus. When he met with honest men whom he liked... We know what were the conditions of their dwellings in 1846. The more or less extensive application of division of labour depends on length of purse, not on greatness of genius. I have onTy half an hour sometimes; on Thursday, Friday, and Saturday." 1 Dr. Greenhow states that the average duration of life in the pottery districts of Stoke-on-Trent, and Wolstanton is ex- traordinarily short. The wealth of a na- tion corresponds with its population, and its misery corresponds with its wealth. c, p. of firing, and something for waste iron to go out of this, which takes off altogether 2%d. Comm., V. The form of wood, for instance, is altered, by making a table out of it. It was, therefore, not necessary to rep- resent our labourer in connexion with other labourers; man and his labour on one side, Nature and its materials on the other, sufficed. of Insp. The whole movement, therefore, seems to turn in a vicious circle, out of which we can only get by supposing a primitive accumulation (previous accu- mulation of Adam Smith) preceding capitalistic accumulation; an accumulation not the result of the capitalist mode of production but its starting-point. 1 "The limit, however, to the employment of both the operative and the labourer is the same; namely, the possibility of the employer realising a profit on the produce of their industry. The relative magnitude of the element of price, which represents the value of the means of production only, or the constant part of capital consumed, is in direct, the relative magnitude of the other element of price that pays labour (the variable part of capital) is in inverse proportion to the advance of accumulation. We will assume, but merely for the sake of a paral- lel with the production of commodities, that the share of each individual producer in the means of subsistence is determined examples, ruins though they be, in India. Because it is value, it has acquired the occult quality of being able to add value to itself. — F. 2 John Bellers, I. So that in so small a platoon as that of even five, you will find the full complement of all that five men can earn." (E. 454.) "You are then," concludes the bourgeois, "against educa- tion?" "Most certainly not; but," &c. The new capital of £2,000 brings in a surplus-value of £400, and this, too, is capitalised, converted into a second addi- tional capital, which, in its turn, produces a further surplus-value of £80. Hence the watchword of the mercantilists, balance of trade. Since 1848, the factory inspec- tors have never tired of twitting the masters with this "last," this "fatal hour." Thus Mr. Hovell in his report of the 21st May, 1855: "Had the follow- ing ingenious calculation (he quotes Senior) been correct, every cotton fac- tory in the United Kingdom would have been working at a loss since the year 1850." (Reports of the Insp. He found that in this locality, where much labour is employed, various cots had been destroyed and no new ones built. To put it mathematically: the rate of accumulation is the independ- ent, not the dependent, variable; the rate of wages, the depend- ent, not the independent, variable. Let us therefore keep within the bounds of exchange where sellers are also buyers, and buyers, sellers. Deer-forests 1 and the people cannot co-exist. All other conditions remaining the same, the surplus- 3 3 labour will fall from 5 -7- hours to 4 — hours, a period that still 14 gives a very profitable rate of surplus-value, namely 82-^-%. The distribution of the work within the family, and the regulation of the labour-time of the several members, depend as well upon differences of age and sex as upon natural conditions varying with the seasons. In the former case, we had the expropriation of the mass of the people by a few usurpers; in the latter, we have the expropriation of a few usurpers by the mass of the people. of these .... 4 1. Animals and plants, which we are accustomed to consider as products of Nature, are in their present form, not only products of, say last year's labour, but the result of a gradual transformation, con- tinued through many generations, under man's superintendence, and by means of his labour. c, v. 1 On the other hand, the English cotton machinery produced an acute effect in India. On the other hand, constant labour of one uniform kind disturbs the intensity and flow of a man's animal spirits, which find recreation and delight in mere change of activity. Ortes says, 1 c, p. 3 I. The learned professor should not study the capitalist process of production in the nursery, nor under circum- stances where the principal personage, the capitalist, is wanting. If in the mean- time the original capital, say £6,000, has increased to £18,000, its variable constituent has also increased. Arrivabene. .of food than the other members of the family, including in the poor- er districts nearly all the meat and bacon .... If the values of all commodities rose or fell simultaneously, and in the same proportion, their relative values would remain unaltered. I return to this example in order to clear up an erroneous notion. operating pretty much as they did when the Norman Con- queror... 1 This first current is started by the countries that exchange their labour, realised in commodities, for the labour embodied in the precious metals by gold and silver-producing countries. Dunton. c, 82, p. So soon as it shall happen that the children of the manufacturers themselves have to go through a course of schooling as helpers in the mill, this almost unexplored territory of mechanics will soon make remarkable progress. This House will hardly be- lieve it, but I tell them, that this traffic in human flesh was as well kept up, they were in effect as regularly sold to these [Man- chester] manufacturers as slaves are sold to the cotton-grower in the United States In 1860, 'the cotton trade was 1 John Ward: "The Borough of Stoke-upon-Trent," London, 1843, p. 1853.— 1 in 28. The same exchange- value, i.e., the same quantity of incorporated social labour, re- mains throughout in the hands of the owner of the commodity, first in the shape of his own commodity, then in the form of the money for which he exchanged it, and lastly, in the shape of the commodity he buys with that money. The workpeople told the factory inspector: "We work with more spirit, we have the reward ever before us of getting away sooner at nijtfht, and one active and cheerful spirit pervades the whole mill, from the youngest piecer to the oldest hand, and we can greatly help each other." (1. 22. 22. But very soon external circumstances cause a different use to be made of the concentration of the work- men on one spot, and of the simultaneousness of their work. Reduce, compress the cotton trade by taking away its working power and reducing their wages expenditure, say one-fifth, or five millions, and what then would happen to the class above, the small shopkeepers; and what of the rents, the cottage rents.... But, if the hands remain in a factory aft- er the machinery has ceased to revolve . No. 71,961 Acres. 34. This shows that when placed in value-relation to the linen, the coat signifies more than when out of that relation, just as many a man strutting about in a gorgeous uniform counts for more than when in mufti. li. There is not a word alluding to exchange-value or to the cheapening of commodi- ties. . In the meantime the pressure from without grew more threatening. According to the experiments of Valentin and Brunner, it appears that a healthy man gives off about 1,300 cubic inches of carbonic acid per hour; this would give about 8 ounces of solid carbon thrown off from the lungs in 24 hours. c, p. 2, 3. Gov. von Maurer, "Ein- leitung zur Geschichte der Mark—, &c. The law of exchange requires equality only between the ex- change-values of the commodities given in exchange for one another. It was necessary to conjure up in the twinkling of an eye the gorgeous dresses for the noble ladies bidden to the ball in honour of the newly-imported Princess of Wales. 42, 50. Let us take his work: "Budgets economiques des classes ouvrieres de la Bel- gique," Bruxelles, 1855. 9. c, p. c, p. c, p. The result was a considerable increase in my profits." Ure says of a machine used in calico printing: "At length capitalists sought deliverance from this intolerable bondage" [namely the, in their eyes, burdensome terms of their contracts with the workmen] "in the resources of science, and were speedi- ly re-instated in their legitimate rule, that of the head over the inferior members." Speaking of an invention for dressing warps: "Then the combined malcontents, who fancied themselves impreg- nably intrenched behind the old lines of division of labour, found their flanks turned and their defences rendered useless by the new mechanical tactics, and were obliged to surrender at dis- cretion." With regard to the invention of the self-acting mule, 1 "The relation of master and man in the blown-flint bottle trades amounts to a chronic strike." Hence the impetus given to the manufacture of pressed glass, in which the chief operations are done by machinery. to 8.30 p. 81, n. The mercantilists lay special stress on the qualitative aspect of the expression of value, and consequent- ly on the equivalent form of commodities, which attains its full perfection in money. The master tries, therefore, to run up, within the smallest space possible at the mouth of the pit, just so many cottages as are necessary to pack together his hands and their families. Of these variations we shall consider those alone that have been the most important in the history of prices. It is more likely that silver will for- feit its money function more and more in the markets of the world. l We have seen that even in the case of simple reproduction, all capital, whatever its original source, becomes converted into accumulated capital, capitalised surplus-value. Jxxiii., n. It is quite clear that a boy who has been at school all the morning, cannot (in hot weather particularly) cope with one who comes fresh and bright from his work." 2 Further information on this point will be found in Senior's speech at the Social Science Congress at Edinburgh in 1863. It enabled a totally inexperienced boy, to set the whole loom with all its shuttles in motion, by simply moving a rod backwards and forwards, and in its improved form produced from 40 to 50 pieces at once. . noussommes d'autant plus riches, nos services productifs ont d'autant plus de valeur qu'ils obtiennent dans l'echange appele production une plus grande quantite de choses utiles." (J. In Part VII. The reason why means of production do not lose their value, at the same time that they lose their use-value, is this: they lose in the labour-process the original form of their use-^ value, only to assume in the product the form of a new use-value. of Insp. Danielson (Nikolai— on) Marx proposed that this sentence be corrected to read as follows: "And, as a matter of fact, the value of each single yard is but the materialised form of a part of the social labour expended on the whole number of yards." An analogous correction was made in a copy of the second German edition of the first volume of "Capital" belonging to Marx; however, not in his hand- writing. (14 lb) 34.2 Hay, 1,609,569 1,678,493 68,924 Hay, tons, . It follows from this, that an increase in the productiveness of labour causes a fall in the value of labour-power and a consequent rise in surplus-value, while, on the other hand, a decrease in such productiveness causes a rise in the value of labour-power, and a fall in surplus-value. (Reports, &c, April, 1849, p. (Imperial privileges and sanc- tions for Silesia, I., 25.) For a whole century in the decrees of the small German potentates a bitter cry goes up again and again about the wicked and imper- tinent rabble that will not reconcile itself to its hard lot, will not be content with the legal wage; the individual landed proprietors are forbidden to pay more than the State had fixed by a tariff. . The surplus-population was absorbed.'" The Bury Guardian said, on the completion of the French treaty, that "10,000 additional hands could be absorbed by Lancashire, and that 30,000 or 40,000 will be needed." After the "flesh agents and sub-agents" had in vain sought through the agricultural districts, "a deputation came up to London, and waited on the right hon. The secret of the self-expansion of capital resolves itself into having the disposal of a definite quantity of other people's unpaid labour. These are candidates for the industrial reserve army, and are, in times of great prosperity, as 1860, e.g., speedily and in large numbers enrolled in the active 1 "Poverty seems favourable to generation." (A. 2 "Under this simple form ... 39, says "one man has employed himself a week in providing this necessary of life .. 2 From the report of the Commissioners in 1863, the following: Dr. J. Their emigration was prevented. 8 Even J. We are not aware of this, nevertheless we do it. For it is the only country where artificers may not in any way med- dle with the affairs of another class of citizens, but must follow that calling alone which by law is hereditary in their clan.... 76, n. In every case the working-class creates by the surplus-labour of one year the capital destined -to em- ploy additional labour in the following year. xxxi. commodities ... Ch. Morton, Art., "La- bourer," where this method is recommended to the farmers as an approved one. Upon 618 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION only becomes more extensive, i.e., the sphere of capital's exploitation and rule merely extends with its own dimensions and the number of its subjects. II faut done filer pour suppleer a ce vide ....il faut y apporter la plus grande assiduite. How far may the working-day be extended beyond the working-time necessary for the reproduction of labour-power itself?" It has been seen that to these ques- tions capital replies: the working-day contains the full 24 hours, with the deduction of the few hours of repose without which labour-power absolutely refuses its services again. + £90 var.)+ £90 surpl. 2 "The great proportion of fixed to circulating capital . At that hour he 'makes the dough,' —a laborious process, which lasts from half an hour to three quarters of an hour, according to the size of the batch or the labour bestowed upon it. 3 "An Essay," &c, pp. 242.) James Mill, however, never got on the track of this "remarkably peculiar property." 2 "It is true indeed, that the first introducing a manufacture employes many poor, but they cease not to be so, and the continuance of it makes many." ("Reasons for a Limited Exportation of Wool." London, 1677, p. 1,097,937 „ 1,044 „ 1,066,912,, 121 „ 1,320,996,, 186 ., Of these . A., etc. In the first place, in the form of machinery, the implements of labour become automatic, things moving and working inde- pendent of the workman. This is his productive consumption. The differentiation of commodities into commodities and money does not sweep away these inconsistencies, but develops a mo- dus vivendi, a form in which they can exist side by side. Paris, 1843. THE GENERAL LAW OP CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 635 subsist, and you must do the rest by accommodating your num- bers to the means of subsistence." 1 Capitalist production can by no means content itself with the quantity of disposable labour-power which the natural in- crease of population yields. in this one workhouse . a week, minus a rent of £4 a year ... In the ordinary run of things, the labourer can be left to the "natural laws of production," i.e., to his dependence on capital, a dependence springing from, and guaranteed in perpetuity by, the conditions of production themselves. With regard to the money spent, the new value is merely a reproduction; but, nevertheless, it is an actual, and not, as in the case of the value of the means of production, only an apparent, reproduction. But without the leave, and behind the back, of our weaver, the old-fashioned mode of weaving undergoes a change. Empl. Murray, 12 years of age, says: "I turn jigger, and run moulds. oi Nations," London, 1821, p. Hence it is self-evident that the labourer is nothing else, his whole life through, than labour-power, that therefore all his disposable time is by nature and law labour-time, to be devoted to the self-expansion of capital. One conse- quence is that the female population grows more rapidly than the male, teste England. In face of the infamous cowardice of character that reigns to-day, and believes most devoutly in "the laws of commerce," it is our bounderi duty again and again to brand the Burkes, who only differ from their successors in one thing— talent. For instance, after propounding the "doctrine" stated above, that capital, with the aid of science taken into its pay, always reduces the refractory hand of labour to docility, he grows indignant because "it(physico- mechanical science) has been accused of lending itself to the rich capitalist as an instrument for harassing the poor." After preach- ing a long sermon to show how advantageous the rapid develop- ment of machinery is to the working-classes, he warns them, that by their obstinacy and their strikes they hasten that development. The linen, which in his eyes is a mere commodity, a depos- itory of value, he alienates in exchange for gold, which is the linen's value-form, and this form he again parts with for another commodity, the Bible, which is destined to enter his house as an object of utility and of edification to its inmates. If the labourer in consequence of increase of trade works 12 hours, the price of labour remaining the same, his daily wage now rises to 3 shillings 7-^-d. xv., p. coffee or = 1 quarter corn or =2 ounces gold or=y ton iron or =&c.) J . Quantity Exported, 1860. . 13.) 2 "That letter might be looked upon as the manifesto of the manufac- turers." (Ferrand: "Motion on the Cotton Famine," H. of cotton, value 20s., and spindle worn away, 4s.): it is therefore constant capital. l The total quantity of money functioning during a given period as the circulating medium, is determined, on the one 1 "Money being ... The latter class comprises more than three-fourths of the total number of bakers, (p. .] and a population, for which the houses were not intended and quite unfit, has been created, whose surroundings are truly degrading to the adults and ruinous to the children." 1 The more rapidly capital accumulates in an industrial or commer- cial town, the more rapidly flows the stream of exploitable human material, the more miserable are the improvised dwellings of the labourers. The relative mass of the industrial reserve army increases therefore with the potential energy of wealth. Growth of capital involves growth of its variable constituent or of the part invested in labour-power. London printers. This was laughed at as a commu- nistic Utopia; so were his "Combination of children's education with pro- ductive labour" and the Co-operative Societies of working-men, first called into being by him. But in ascribing wages to the mother of the family we raise the question of the direction of the household. His position is similar to that of the old Roman villicus, only in a more limited sphere of action. This expropriation is accomplished by the action of the immanent laws of capitalistic production itself, by the centralisation of capital. Other days I began at 6 in the morning, and gi'en over at 6 or 7 in the evening," &c. . The dispersion of the rural labourers over larger areas breaks their power of resistance while concentration increases that of the town operatives. 1 .... It is not money that renders commodities commensurable. The total circulation of commodities in a given country during a given period is made up on the one hand of numerous isolated and simultaneous partial metamorphoses, sales which are at the same time purchases, in which each coin changes its place only once, or makes only one move; on the other hand, of numerous distinct series of metamorphoses partly running side by side, and partly coalescing with each other, in each of which series each coin makes a number of moves, the number being greater or less according to circumstances. They work these long hours underground until their 18th or 22nd year, when they are put to miner's work proper (n. A rise in the price of labour, as a consequence of accumulation of capital, only means, in fact, that the length and weight of the golden chain the wage-worker has already forged for himself, allow of a relax- ation of the tension of it. . xlvi., n. to 6 p. The latter point, the only one that here interests us, is repeated in the Statute of 1496 (Henry VII.). c, p. Because this power costs capital nothing, and because, on the oth- er hand, the labourer himself does not develop it before his la- bour belongs to capital, it appears as a power with which capital is endowed by Nature— a productive power that is immanent in capital. This letter was rightly called in the House of Com- mons, the manufacturers' manifesto. The chief part of the products is destined for direct use by the communi- ty itself, and does not take the form of a commodity. H. They abolished the feudal tenure of land, i.e., they got rid of all its obligations to the State, "indemnified" the State by taxes on the peasantry and the rest of the mass of the people, vindicated for themselves the rights of modern private property in estates to which they had only a feudal title, and, finally, passed those laws of settle- ment, which, mutatis mutandis, had the same effect on the Eng- lish agricultural labourer, as the edict of the Tartar Boris Godunof on the Russian peasantry. 342. The productiveness of a machine is therefore measured by the human labour-power it replaces. They must be sold, their value realised in money, this money afresh converted into capital, and so over and over again. e., for shortening the working-time required in the production of a commodity, it becomes in the hands of capital the most powerful means, in those industries first invaded by it, for lengthening the working-day beyond all bounds set by human nature. No. 48,653 Acres. The wage-labourer loses into the bargain, along with the relation of dependence, also the sentiment of dependence on the abstemious capitalist. In that specification his steam-engine is described, not as an invention for a specific purpose, but as an agent universally applicable in Mechanical Industry. On the one hand piece- wages facilitate the interposition of parasites between the capitalist and the wage-labourer, the "sub-letting of labour." The gain of these middlemen comes entirely from the difference between the labour-price which the capitalist pays, and the part of that price 1 "Le salaire peut se mesurer de deux manieres: ou sur la duree du tra- vail, ou sur son produit." ("Abrege elementaire des principes de l'Economie Politique." Paris 1796, p. — -r f = V ft 1 it» oi course, loses all mean- Working-day oi a given number ot hours ' ing as soon as the working-day ceases to contain a definite number of hours. Here, we encounter again the system described above of domestic industry, which in under- payment and over-work, possesses its own systematic means for creating supernumerary labourers. Ellis, one of the firm of Messrs. Commodity— Money— Commodity. A man or a commu- nity is rich, a pearl or a diamond is valuable... So that every art, trade, or engine, doing work with labour of fewer hands, and consequently cheaper, begets in others a kind of necessity and emulation, either of using the same art, trade, or engine, or of inventing something like it, that every maD may be upon the square, that no man may be able to undersell his neighbour." ("The Advantages of the East India Trade to England." London, 1720, p. A does not trouble himself about my transaction with B, nor does B about my business with A. This division of labour is a necessary condition for the production of commodities, but it does not follow, conversely, that the production of commodities is a necessary condition for the division of labour. Reports, &c, for 31st October, 1848, p. -Gov. His stock-book contains a list of the objects of utility that belong to him, of the operations necessary for their production; and last- ly, of the labour-time that definite quantities of those objects have, on an average, cost him. The rate of surplus- value remaining the same or even falling, so long as it only falls more slowly, than the productive power of labour rises, the mass of the surplus-product increases. In the year 1847 there MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 447 All the persons employed in textile factories and in mines, taken together, number 1,208,442; those employed in textile factories and metal industries, taken together, number 1,039,605; in both cases less than the number of modern domestic slaves. To produce this effect, it is by no means requisite that the prices of all commodities should rise or fall simultaneously. Econ." London, 1830, p. In this work, Malthus finally discovers, with the help of Sismondi, the beauti- ful Trinity of capitalistic production: over-production, over-popula- tion, over-consumption — three very delicate monsters, indeed. 143.) "Comme signe il est attire par les denrees." (1. For in the small towns the same man makes bedsteads, doors, ploughs, and tables: often, too, he builds houses into the bargain, and is quite content if he finds custom sufficient for his sustenance. "Every transaction in which an individual buys produce in order to sell it again, is, in fact, a speculation." (MacCulloch: "A Dictionary Practical, &c, of Commerce." Lond., 1847, p. The results are record- ed in two voluminous Blue books. Force is the midwife of every old society pregnant with a new one. This person, well instructed in economy, resolved, on entering upon her govern- ment, to effect a radical cure, and to turn the whole country, whose population had already been, by earlier processes of the like kind, reduced to 15,000, into a sheep-walk. Auteurs Glassiques.* The period of Modern Mechanical Industry has, of course, very much enlarged his catalogue of labour's diseases. 398 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION is divided, there are, for every 100,000 children alive under the age of one year, only 9,000 deaths in a year on an average (iD one district only 7,047); in 24 districts the deaths are over 10,000, but under 11,000, in 39 districts, over 11,000, but under 12,000; in 48 districts over 12,000, but under 13,000; in 22 districts over 20,000; in 25 districts over 21,000; in 17 over 22,000; in 11 over 23,000; in Hoo, Wolverhampton, Ashton-under-Lyne, and Pres- ton, over 24,000; in Nottingham, Stockport, and Bradford, over 25,000; in Wisbeach, 26,000; and in Manchester, 26,125 l . The exchange becomes an accomplished fact by two metamorphoses of opposite yet supplementary character — the conversion of the commodity into money, and the re-conversion of the money into a commodity. The use-value of commodities be- comes valueless, and their value vanishes in the presence of its own independent form. They are peculiarly the creatures of civil institutions, 2 which have recognised that individuals may acquire 1 Bernard de Mandeville: "The Fable of the Bees," 5th edition, Lon- don, 1728. 1 16 Edward Street, No. 4 ... I have to bawl at them to keep them awake." W. There is also no doubt that such revolutionary ferments, the final result of which is the abolition of the old division of labour, are diametrically opposed to the capitalistic form of production, and to the economic status of the labourer corresponding to that form. Although by no means new — it figures side by side with time-wages officially in the French and English labour stat- utes of the 14th century — it only conquers a larger field for action during the period of Manufacture, properly so-called. 135.) Very often the beerseller or grocer of the village is at the same time the letter of its houses. 1639.) "Why should education be more valuable to them than to other CAPITALIST PRODUCTION classes of lads?" "I do not know that it is more valuable; but through the over-exertion in mines there is less chance for the boys that are employed there to get education, either at Sunday schools, or at day schools." (n. • 1. 3 This simultaneity, it is true, is due to the general 1 "In so close a cohabitation of the people, the carriage must needs be less." ("The Advantages of the East India Trade," p. c, p. is capital." (Mac- leod: "The Theory and Practice of Banking." London, 1855, v. And yet, though wages sink lower and lower, profits appear, with each alteration in the scale of wages, to increase. But the mischiefs of the trade, in the metropolis especially, are that it is monopolised by some twenty-six capitalists, who, under the advan- tages that spring from capital, can bring in capital to force economy out of labour. 150. Therefore the value of the product is -j greater than the value advanced for its production; 27 shillings have been trans- formed into 30 shillings; a surplus-value of 3 shillings has been created. . 122, 739, 1747). But with a spinning-wheel, supposing the hand-spinner to produce thirteen ounces of yarn in sixty hours, the same weight of cotton would absorb 2,700 days' labour of ten hours each, or 27,000 hours' labour. Ferguson, 1. If half a day's average social labour is incor- porated in three shillings, then three shillings is the price corre- sponding to the value of a day's labour-power. Hence commodities must be realised as values before they can be realised as use-values. Instead of being set free, a part of the capital is here locked up in such a way as to cease to be exchanged against labour-power: variable has been changed into constant capital. 70, 71. On the one hand, the exchange-val- ue of these means of production is not increased; for the exchange- value of a commodity is not raised by its use-value being consumed more thoroughly and to greater advantage. It is thus with the people of Asia, and partic- ularly of the East Indies. Nay, more, the excessive prolongation of the working-day turned out to be the peculiar product of Modern Industry. Hence, it is a law, based on the very nature of manufac- ture, that the minimum amount of capital, which is bound to be in the hands of each capitalist, must keep increasing; in other words, 360 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION that the transformation into capital of the social means of produc- tion and subsistence must keep extending. Hoarding serves various purposes in the economy of the met- allic circulation. which treats of the history of the theory, it will be more clearly seen, that the production of surplus-value has at all times been made, by classical political economists, the distinguishing characteristic of the productive labourer. 77, 69. The hour of vulgar economy had struck. The rag-sorters are the medium for the spread of small-pox and other infectious diseases, and they themselves are the first victims. 30.) 574 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION annihilation of the necessaries of life, the continued re-appearance of the workman in the labour-market. There are, therefore, methods of lowering the price of labour independent of the reduction of the nominal daily or weekly wages. and it rises to 9s., that is a rise of 28YP er cent., which sounds very fine. "The want of servants and labourers was very troublesome to the landed pro- prietors in the depopulated districts. 4 Thus was laid the foundation of capitalistic production in this trade, of the unlimited extension of the working-day and of night-labour, although the latter only since 1824 gained a se- rious footing, even in London. Just as little does it proceed from the nature of the determining factors of value. Manufacture takes its rise in two ways: — (1.) By the assemblage, in one workshop under the control of a single capitalist, of labourers belonging to various independent handicrafts, but through whose hands a given article must pass on its way to completion. The rate of profit is, as we have already said, the ratio of the surplus-value to the total capital advanced; the rate of surplus-value is the ratio of the surplus-value to the variable part of that capital. The price then, is merely the money-name of the quantity of social labour realised in his commodity. For our purpose, it suf- fices to consider the 5 years from 1861-1865 during which over half-a-million emigrated, and the absolute 'number of people sank by more than l \ s of a million. Not only does the degree of exploitation of the wage-labourer remain indecently low. Apply- ing this to man, he that would criticise all human acts, movements, rela- tions, etc., by the principle of utility, must first deal with human nature in general, and then with human nature as modified in each historical epoch. c, p. Thousands of Irish fam- ilies, who according to the testimony of the English, eaten up as these are with national prejudice, are notable for their rare at- tachment to the domestic hearth, for their gaiety and the purity of their home-life, found themselves suddenly transplanted into hotbeds of vice. If the newly introduced ma- chinery had cost less than did the labour-power and implements displaced by it, if, for instance, instead of costing £1,500, it had cost only £1,000, a variable capital of £1,000 would have been converted into constant capital, and locked up; and a capital of £500 would have been set free. liv. 11.) "Conversion of revenue into capital." (Malthus: "Princ. One portion is consumed by the capitalist as revenue, 2 the other is employed as capital, is accumulated. If a dressmaker can get a little circle of customers, such is the competition that, in her home, she must work to the death to hold together, and this same over-work she must of necessity inflict on any who may assist her. In another part of the yard was a rickety little wooden house, and when we opened the door of it, we found it filled with men who were huddled together shoulder to shoulder, for the warmth of one another's bodies and breath. The two metamorphoses constituting the circuit are at the same time two inverse partial metamorphoses of two other com- modities. These different articles are, as regards the family, so many products of its labour, but as between themselves, they are not commodities. 33. Long before his time, the task was at- tempted with much better success by Gray, Bray, and others. It is therefore nothing unusual either for the landlord to raise a labourer's rent as soon as he hears that he is earning a little more, or for the farmer to lower the wage of the la- bourer, "because his wife has found a trade," 1. The third, when luxury began, and the trade was pushed by sending out riders for orders into every market town in the Kingdom It is probable that few or no capi- tals of £3,000 to £4,000 acquired by trade existed here before 1690. Les institutions de la feodalite sont des institutions artificielles, celles de la bour- geoisie sont des institutions naturelles. The hoarder, therefore, makes a sacrifice of the lusts of the flesh to his gold fetish. that England was neuer less furnished with people than at the present ... If only a part, say one half, were consumed, the same result would follow at the end of 10 years, since 10 x£l00 =£1,000. In insolent conflict with king and parliament, the great feudal lords created an incomparably larger proletar- iat by the forcible driving of the peasantry from the land, to which the latter had the same feudal right as the lord himself, and by the usurpation of the common lands. Now-a-days, all machines that have their way to make, such as sewing-machines, bread-making machines, &c, are, unless from their very nature their use on a small scale is excluded, constructed to be driven both by human and by purely mechanical motive power. d. Thus there is nothing to disturb their application to their calling.... The large workshops, undertakings of certain private persons who pay labourers from day to day to work for their gain, may be able to put these private individuals at their ease, but they will never be an object worth the attention of governments. His dexter- ity at his own particular trade seems in this manner to be acquired at the expense of his intellectual, social, and martial virtues. But, by the very act of adding new value, he preserves their former values. By an Act, 25 Henry VIII., the same law was renewed. Such improvements as the apparatus that stops a drawing frame, whenever a sliver breaks, and the self-acting stop, that stops the power-loom so soon as the shuttle bobbin is emptied of weft, are quite modern inventions. The hours of work for these hands are unlimited. There is a time when the mas- ter's right in his workman's labour ceases, and his time becomes his own, even if there were no exhaustion in the question." (Reports, &c., for 31st Oct., 1862, p. The money is no longer the means that brings about the process. XXV., n. The capitalist who produces surplus-value — i.e., who ex- tracts unpaid labour directly from the labourers, and fixes it in com- modities, is, indeed, the first appropriator, but by no means the ultimate owner, of this surplus-value. Hence, independently of this latter circum- stance, there is a motive for each individual capitalist to cheap- en his commodities, by increasing the productiveness of labour. Nevertheless, even when circumstances allow the law to operate, subsidiary movements may occur. is commonly represented as a highly improved county ... We might therefore just as well say that the buyer performs "strictly an act of production/' by converting stockings, for example, into money. 96 and 127. And as with the variable, so it is with the constant capital. in Egypt reached the requisite degree of per- fection. I allow that the workers are not a property, not the property of Lancashire and the masters; but they are the strength of both; they are the mental and trained power which cannot be replaced for a generation; the mere ma- chinery which they work might much of it be beneficially replaced, nay improved, in a twelvemonth. The surplus-labour would in this case be prolonged only by an overstepping of its normal lim- its; its domain would be extended only by a usurpation of part of the domain of necessary labour-time. Suppose that a capital-value at first is divided into 50 per cent, of constant and 50 per cent, of variable capital; later into 80 per cent, of constant and 20 per cent, of variable. He described it as a machine "to spin without fingers." 3 1 See, for instance, Hutton: "Course of Mathematics." 2 "From this point of view we may draw a sharp line of distinction between a tool and a machine: spades, hammers, chisels, &c, combinations of levers and of screws, in all of which, no matter how complicated they may be in other respects, man is the motive power, ... 1691, pp. 761,909 . This result, however, would be 1 The value of his average daily wages is determined by what the la- bourer requires "so as to live, labour, and generate." (Wm. Petty: "Political Anatomy of Ireland," 1672, p. MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 467 The lace finishing is done either in what are called "mis- tresses' houses," or by women in their own houses, with or with- out the help of their children. In fact these bourgeois economists instinctively saw, and rightly so, that it is very dangerous to stir too deeply the burning question of the origin of surplus-value. Comm., Third Rep.," pp. Our cotton mills may be brought to a stand by the periodical stagnations of trade, which, under pres- ent arrangements, are as inevitable as death itself; but the human mind is con- stantly at work, and although we believe we are under the mark in stating that six millions of persons have left these shores during the last 25 years, yet, from the natural increase of population, and the displacement of labour to cheapen production, a large percentage of the male adults in the mostpros- perous times find it impossible to obtain work in factories on any condi- tions whatever." ("Reports of Insp. But America's rich silver deposits have so far barely been tapped, and thus the prospects are that the value of this metal will keep on dropping for rather a long time to come. "On Machinery." 2 Nota bene. James I. H. Ought it to expend a part of the public money in the attempt to confound and blend together two classes of labour, which are striving after division and separation?" 1 Some crippling of body and mind is inseparable even from division of labour in society as a whole. Accordingly, Messrs. Public credit becomes the credo of capital. How then is the value, e.g., of a 12 hours' work- ing-day to be determined? 129, 130.) [For details as to how the present large landed proprietors of Eng- land came into their possessions see "Our Old Nobility. The problem is already solved. On the 9th September instant, Mr. Kelson, surgeon, reported to me further cases of small-pox in the same huts, and he described their condition as most dis- l. E.\ 1 The opponents, themselves, of the mercantile system, a system which considered the settlement of surplus trade balances in gold and silver as the aim of international trade, entirely misconceived the functions of money of the world. On our supposition, however, he would have to employ two labourers in order to live, on the surplus-value appropriated daily, as well as, and no better than a labourer, i.e., to be able to satis- fy his necessary wants. What be- comes of the production of wage-labourers, supernumerary in proportion to the accumulation of capital? But the value of every commodity is determined by the labour-time requisite to turn it out so as to be of normal quality. 1865.-109,734,261 lbs. The "full-priced" denounced their rivals before the Parliamentary Committee of Inquiry: "They only exist now by first defrauding the public, and next getting 18 hours' work out of their men for 12 hours' wages.... But they now have to buy bread, and they have no refuse upon which they can feed a pig or fowl, and they have consequently no benefit from the sale of a pig, fowl, or eggs." 1 In fact, formerly, the agricultural labourers were but the smallest of the small farmers, and formed for the most part a kind of rear-guard of the medium and large farms on which they found employment. The increase of mills in the country will, of course, extend these dreadful results, and it will be a great boon if they are brought under the legislature. Hence, if we desire to calculate the average money wages received by each labourer, we have simply to divide the amount of this capital by the number of the labouring population." 2 That is to say, we first add together the individual wages actually paid, and then we affirm that the sum thus obtained, forms the total value of the "labour-fund" determined and vouchsafed to us by God and Nature. 274, 275. The General Congress of Labour at Baltimore (August 16th, 1866) declared: "The first and great necessity of the present, to free the labour of this country from capitalistic slavery, is the passing of a law by which eight hours shall be the normal working-day in all States of the Ameri- can Union. Comm. I long for a stipen- diary magistrate." 3 The crown lawyers declared the masters' interpretation of the Act of 1848 absurd. Not only were the conquered South German peasants again enslaved. "They felt themselves oppressed, but not exactly by the Factory Act." 3 But if the manufacturers did not succeed in making the work- people speak as they wished, they themselves shrieked all the louder in press and Parliament in the name of the workpeople. . The first form, 20 yds. Author of the anonymous work: "Th. Hodgskin." 2 Even as late as 1794, the small cloth-makers of Leeds sent a deputa- tion to Parliament, with a petition for a law to forbid any merchant Irom be- coming a manufacturer. . And, even to the present day, Liverpool "respectability" is the Pindar of the slave-trade which — com- pare the work of Aikin [1795] already quoted — "has coincided with that spirit of bold adventure which has characterised the trade of Liverpool and rapidly carried it to its present state of prosperity; has occasioned vast employment for shipping and sailors, and greatly augmented the demand for the manufactures of the country" (p. 126, p. c, 80, p. Then followed a further reduction of 8-^-% as soon as the working-day was shortened to 11, and a reduc- tion of double that amount as soon as it was finally shortened to 10 hours. and 2s. They were wait- ing for their tickets, but the time had not yet arrived for the distribution. Engels, "Umrisse zu einer Kritik der Nationalokonomie, in: Deutsch-Franzosische Jahrbiicher, herausgegeben von Arnold Ruge und Karl Marx." Paris, 1844, p. They react at the same time on that part of the original capital which has entered upon its stage of renewal. Labour-power exists only as a capacity, or power of the living individual. Newman: "Elements of Polit. Mr. White, however, has a good memory. . The next point for our consideration is, what portion of the value of the yarn is added to the cotton by the labour of the spinner. the Parliamentary Return "Factories Regulation Act" (6th August, 1859), and in it Leonard Horner's "Suggestions for amending the Factory Acts to enable the Inspectors to prevent illegal working, now becoming very prevalent." 3 "Children of the age of 8 years and upwards, have, indeed, been em- ployed from 6 a. If I purchase 2,000 lbs. 1 )> 7 " 33 Roberts Court . of linen =one coat, already contains this antagonism, without as yet fixing it. A characteristic feature is, that, even down into the eighteenth century, the different trades were called "mysteries" (mysteres); 1 into their secrets none but those duly initiated could penetrate. . The lengthening of the working-day, on the other hand, allows of production on an extended scale without any alteration in the amount of capital laid out on machinery and buildings. The gang in its classical form just described, is called the public, common, or tramping gang. 405.) "A complete revo- lution" (1. The sporadic application of co- operation on a large scale in ancient times, in the middle ages, and in modern colonies, reposes on relations of dominion and servi- tude, principally on slavery. 2 Destutt de Tracy, 1. * There is this to boot, that the same individual can do certain kinds of work just as well on a large as on a small scale; for instance, the labour of superintendence, the carriage of the fractional product from one stage to the next, &c. And so it is with the capitalist; when he has consumed the equivalent of his original capital, the value of his present capital represents nothing but the total amount of the surplus-value appro- priated by him without payment. -{-3s. 2 Herr Wilhelm Thucydides Roscher has found a mare's nest. Some of the hands always work in the night, without any alterna- tion of day and night work We do not find any differ- ence in the health of those who work regularly by night and those who work by day, and probably people can sleep better if they have the same period of rest than if it is changed About 20 of the boys under the age of 18 work in the night sets. . "No part of the population of America is exclusively agricultural, excepting slaves 1 1 c, pp. And the proportion of circulating capital is a hundred or thousand times less ... Carlisle, Sir B. 2yd., 1 3 needle-women 2s. 3 Reports, &c, I. Nineteen weeks of enforced idleness had brought them to this pass, and while the mother told the history of that bitter past, she moaned as if all her faith in a future that should atone for it were dead. 17. Edward VI.: A statute of the first year of his reign, 1547, ordains that if anyone refuses to work, he shall be condemned as a slave to the person who has denounced him as an idler. He then seeks to explain away the mystical character of gold and silver, by sub- stituting for them less dazzling commodities, and by reciting, with ever renewed satisfaction, the catalogue of all possible com- modities which at one time or another have played the part of equivalent. 4 For children's labour, the Act of 1844 remained in force. "The object of improved machinery is to diminish manual labour, to provide for the performance of a process or the completion of a link in a manufacture by the aid of an iron instead of the human apparatus." 2 "The adaptation of power to ma- chinery heretofore moved by hand, is almost of daily occurrence. 581.) Bourgeois examiner, himself a mine-owner: "But ... Whence, then, arises the enigmatical character of the product of labour, so soon as it assumes the form of commodities? The labourers give these order- notes back just as constantly to the capitalist class, and in this way get their share of their own product. 2 On the 27th April, 1863, Mr. Ferrand said in the House of Commons: "I have been informed by delegates from 16 districts of Lancashire and Cheshire, in whose behalf I speak, that the work in the factories is, in consequence of the improvements in machin- 1 "Reports, &c, for 31st October, 1858," pp. with a rood, or half-acre or acre of land, and facilities for . This was the result of an unusual exodus of the agricultural surplus-population caused by the demands of war, the vast exten- sion of railroads, factories, mines, &c. Out of this latter sum, then, we reckon as advanced for the purpose of turning out the product, the sum of £54 alone, which the machinery loses by wear and tear in the process; for this is all it parts with to the product. In India they employ 1 According to the annual report (1863) of the Essen chamber of com- merce, there was produced in 1862, at the cast-steel works of Krupp, with its 161 furnaces, thirty-two steam-engines (in the year 1800 this was about the number of all the steam-engines working in Manchester), and fourteen steam-hammers (representing in all 1,236 horse-power), forty-nine forges, 203 tool-machines, and about 2,400 workmen— thirteen million pounds of cast steel. But besides this, at a certain stage of its development, Modern Industry became technologically incompatible with the basis furnished for it by handicraft and Manufacture. With this polarisation of the market for commodities, the fundamental conditions of capitalist produc- tion are given. c, p. and 3 / 4 d. Even on princely estates .... Comm. Arkwright's throstle-spinning mill was from the very first turned by water. No matter how this value varies, the proportions between the values of different quantities of the metal remain constant. How can that be expected from a man who has been at such work for 29 or 30 hours, exposed to the weather, and without rest. "The characteristic feature of our modern me- chanical improvements, is the introduction of self-acting tool ma- chinery. The course characteristic of modern industry, viz., a decennial cycle (interrupted by smaller oscillations), of periods of average activity, production at high Econ.," Lond. the percentage of bad ones may be a little more . Burke's Pamphlet on the ducal house of Bedford, whose offshoot was Lord John Russell, the "tomtit of Liberalism." 2 "The farmers forbid cottagers to keep any living creatures besides themselves and children, under the pretence that if they keep any beasts or poultry, they will steal from the farmers' barns for their support; they also say, keep the cottagers poor and you will keep them industrious, &c, but the real fact, I believe, is that the farmers may have the whole right of common to themselves." ("A Political Inquiry into the Consequences of Enclosing Waste Lands." London, 1785, p. In practice, however, the conditions were much more favourable to the labourers than in the statute-book. Employing surplus-value as capital, reconverting it into capital, is called accumulation of capital. The relative value of commodity A, i.e., its value expressed in com- modity B, rises and falls directly as the value of A, the value of B being supposed constant. It may be presented to the buyer. . To a barbarian owner of commodi- ties, and even to a West-European peasant, value is the same as value-form, and therefore, to him the increase in his hoard of gold and silver is an increase in value. of yarn are an equivalent for 10 lbs. He works for a quarter of an hour (sometimes more, sometimes less) after 2 p. This is the dilemma incessantly presented to the labourers." According to this the budget of the family is: The father 300 working-days at fr. 6, p. But I am quite sure, from my best observation, that any given five men will, in their total, afford a proportion of labour equal to any other five within the periods of life I have stated; that is, that among such five men there will be one possessing all the qualifications of a good workman, one bad, and the other three middling, and approximating to the first and the last. What appears to happen is, not that gold becomes money, in consequence of all other commodities expressing their values in it, but, on the contrary, that all other commodities universally express their values in gold, because it is money. In the second form, on the contrary, we perceive at once the background that determines, and is essentially different from, this accidental appearance. M. Macleod, who has taken upon himself to dress up the confused ideas of Lombard Street in the most learned finery, is a successful cross between the superstitious mercantilists, and the enlightened Free-trade bagmen. Both circuits are resolvable into the same two antithetical phases, C— M, a sale, and M— C, a purchase. With the possibility of holding and storing up exchange-value in the shape of a particular commodity, arises also the greed for gold. Comm. An uncommonly knowing dodge this. The fact is that, as the Irish population diminishes, the Irish rent-rolls swell; that depop^ ulation benefits the landlords, therefore also benefits the soil, and, therefore, the people, that mere accessory of the soil. But what "clearing of estates" really and properly signifies, we learn only in the promised land of modern romance, the Highlands of Scotland. 35, 36, 38. "An Essay on the Production of Wealth.' London, 1SZ1, p. White slave trade; 1835 great prosperity, con- temporaneous starvation of the hand-loom weavers; 1836 great prosperity; 1837 and 1838 depression and crisis; 1839 revival; 1840 great depression, riots, calling out of the military; 1841 and 1842 frightful suffering among the factory operatives; 1842 the manufacturers lock the hands out of the factories in order to en- force the repeal of the Corn Laws. Of these, 2,195 had only one bedroom (of- ten at the same time used as living-room), 2,930 only two, and 250, more than two. For slave-trade read labour-market, for Kentucky and Virginia, Ireland and the agricultural districts of England, Scotland, and Wales, for Africa, Germany. "The town of Newcastle-on-Tyne," says Dr. Hunter, "contains a sample of the finest tribe of our countrymen, often sunk by external circum- stances of house and street into an almost savage degradation." 3 1 1. Accumulate, accumulate! That is Moses and the prophets! "Industry furnishes the material which saving accumulates." 2 Therefore, save, save, i.e., reconvert the greatest possible portion of surplus-value, or surplus-product into capital! Accumulation for accumulation's sake, production for production's sake: by this formula classical economy expressed the historical mission of the bourgeoisie, and did not for a single instant deceive itself over the birth-throes of wealth. To ap- propriate labour during all the 24 hours of the day is, therefore, of the North wants to break the head of the Paul of the South with all his might, because the Peter of the North hires his labour by the day, and the Paul of the South hires his by the life. Marx. Four hours have been set free, and can be annexed to the domain of surplus- labour. Vacheron & Constan- ts, in which machinery has been employed with success, produces at the most three or four different varieties of size and form 2 In watchmaking, that classical example of heterogeneous manufac- ture, we may study with great accuracy the above-mentioned differentiation and specialisation of the instruments of labour caused by the sub-division of handicrafts. . We see, then, all that our analysis of the value of commod- ities has already told us, is told us by the linen itself, so soon as it comes into communication with another commodity, the coat. For the capitalist as buyer paid for each commodity, for the cotton, the spindle and the labour-power, its full value. unimportant source of accumulation, compared with wages and rents, in the earlier stages of society... Again, a particular product may be used in one and the same process, both as an instrument of labour and as raw material. 2 It would be possible to write quite a history of the inventions, made since 1830, for the sole purpose of supplying capital with weapons against the revolts of the working-class. SECTION 2.— THE TWO-FOLD CHARACTER OF THE LABOUR EMBODIED IN COMMODITIES At first sight a commodity presented itself to us as a complex of two things — use-value and exchange-value. An epoch-making work in the history of Political Economy. Whether one kind occupies a greater space in his general activity than another, depends on the difficulties, greater or less as the case may be, to be overcome in attaining the useful effect 1 Even Ricardo has his stories a la Robinson. 2 A French workman, on his return from San- Francisco, writes as follows: "1 never could have believed, that ( was capable ol working at the various occupations 1 was employed on in California. of cot- ton into 10 lbs. Let us listen, e.g., to the contest between Postlethwayt whose Dictionary of Trade then had the same reputation as the kindred works of MacCulloch and MacGregor to-day, and the author (already quoted) of the "Essay on Trade and Commerce." 1 Postlethwayt says among other things: "We cannot put an end to those few observations, without noticing that trite re- mark in the mouth of too many; that if the industrious poor can obtain enough to maintain themselves in five days, they will not work the whole six. Several writers of that time, and among them some who were considered as eminently benevo- lent, mention with exultation the fact that in that single city, boys and girls of very tender age create wealth exceeding what was necessary for their own subsistence by twelve thousand pounds a year. c, p. Stuttgart 1828, pp. Nothing is more characteristic than the pretext for this bourgeois coup d'etat. This quantity of labour forms the value of a day's labour-power or the value of the labour-power daily reproduced. In the same way with regard to money, every trace of a value-relation disappears in the names pound, dollar, franc, ducat, &c. Here, we have nothing more to do with the quality, the na- ture and the specific character of the labour, but merely with its quantity. 24 by 1yd. Hence the diminution in incomes between £60 and £100 in Table E. 3 "One cannot see these unfortunates (in the gold mines between Egypt, Ethiopia, and Arabia) who cannot even have their bodies clean, or their nakedness clothed, without pitying their miserable lot. 2 It is not because he is a leader of industry that a man is a capitalist; on the contrary, he is a leader of industry be- cause he is a capitalist. 1., pp. England, average of spindles per factory 12,600 France, " " " " " 1,500 Prussia, " " " " " 1,500 Belgium, " " " " " 4,000 Saxony, " " " " " 4,500 Austria, * " " 7,000 Switzerland," " " " " 8,000 AVERAGE NUMBER OF PERSONS EMPLOYED TO SPINDLES. c, p. On the other hand, it also serves as a measure of the portion of the common labour borne by each individual, and of his share in the part of the total product destined for individual consumption. 1 But it is moreover self-evi- dent that the difference of form in the payment of wages alters in no way their essential nature, although the one form may be more fa- vourable to the development of capitalist production than the other. 39.) RATE AND MASS OP SURPLUS-VALUE 309 therefore tried to prevent by force the transformation of the mas- ter of a trade into a capitalist, by limiting the number of labour- ers that could be employed by one master within a very small max- imum. It is not to be assumed that we offer for sale articles required for our own consumption. 3 1. From the pole of the com- modity-owner it is a sale, from the opposite pole of the money- owner, it is a purchase. The collective machine, now an organised system of various kinds of single machines, and of groups of single machines, becomes more and more perfect, the more the process as a whole becomes a continuous one, i.e., the less the raw material is interrupted in its passage from its first phase to its last; in other words, the more its passage made. Nevertheless, the London la- bour-market is always over-stocked with German and other candidates for death in the bakeries. Given, on the other hand, the price of labour, the daily or weekly wages depend on the quantity of the daily or weekly labour. 29, 31. Hence the result brought about by the circulation of commodities, namely, the replacing of one commodity by another, takes the appearance of having been effected not by means of the change of form of the commodities, but rather by the money acting as a medium of circulation, by an action that circulates commodities, to all appearance motionless in themselves, and transfers them from hands in which they are non-use-values, to hands in which they are use-values; and that in a direction constantly opposed to the direction of the money. variable capital, the other half represents the 3s. c. . With a general rise in the prices of commodities, the quantity of the circulating medium will remain constant, provided the number of commodities in circulation decrease proportionally to the increase in their prices, or provided the velocity of currency increase at the same rate as prices rise, the number of commodi- ties in circulation remaining constant. Oekon." ,p. We now proceed to consider the substitution of a more intensified labour for labour of more extensive duration, and the degree of the former. But this is not all; when our yarn goes to the manufacturers, it is so much better by the application of our new machinery, that they will produce a greater quantity of cloth, and cheaper than from the yarn produced by old machin- ery." 1 Mr. Redgrave further remarks in the same Report: "The reduction of hands against increased production is, in fact, con- stantly taking place; in woollen mills the reduction commenced some time since, and is continuing; a few days since, the master of a school in the neighbourhood of Rochdale said to me, that the great falling off in the girls' school is not only caused by the dis- tress, but by the changes of machinery in the woollen mills, in con- sequence of which a reduction of 70 short-timers had taken place." 2 The following table shows the total result of the mechanical improvements in the English cotton industry due to the Ameri- can Civil War. The "glorious Revolution" brought into power, along with William of Orange, the landlord and capitalist appropriators of surplus-value. II, p. 1 There is, however, something else required beyond the ex- pression of the specific character of the labour of which the value of the linen consists. x No mystical ideas must in any way be connected, as sometimes happens, with this historically devel- oped productiveness of labour. For when the variation is either in the duration or in the intensity of labour, there is always a cor- responding change in the magnitude of the value created, inde-, pendently of the nature of the article in which that value is embodied. Rep., 1866," p, 114,1). 9.) "In agriculture, there is no more important factor than that of time." (Liebig: "Ueber Theorie und Praxis in der Landwirt- schaft." 1856, p. 2 Favourable natural conditions alone, give us only the possi- bility, never the reality, of surplus-labour, nor, consequently, of surplus-value and a surplus-product. As the measure of value it serves to convert the values of all the manifold commodities into prices, into imaginary quan- tities of gold; as the standard of price it measures those quanti- ties of gold. The muscles of animals, when they are deprived of a proper amount of light, become soft and inelastic, the nervous power loses its tone from defective stimulation^ and the elaboration of all growth seems to be perverted... 63.) 1 So much then for Proudhon's wonderful idea: he "construes" machin- ery not as a synthesis of instruments of labour, but as a synthesis of detail operations for the benefit of the labourer himself. With regard to the mode of production itself, manufac- ture, in its strict meaning, is hardly to be distinguished, in its ear- liest stages, from the handicraft trades of the guilds, otherwise than by the greater number of workmen simultaneously employed by one and the same individual capital. 11, p. Of course no detailed critique of this English industrial code now in effect can be presented here. Ferguson, 1. 52, n. 7.) 2 "Rept.," &c, 30th Sept., 1844, p. D. On the whole the working population, subject to the Fac- tory Act, has greatly improved physically. The same result might follow if, instead of the extensive amount of labour, its intensive amount increased. The same holds good for every kind of refuse resulting from a labour-process, so far at least as such refuse cannot be further employed as a means in the production of new and independent use-values. Every labourer belongs to it during the time when he is only partially employed or wholly unemployed. 2 On the other hand, only in favourable and exception- law. The discovery of gold and silver in America, the extirpation, enslavement and entombment in mines of the aboriginal popula- tion, the beginning of the conquest and looting of the East Indies, the turning of Africa into a warren for the commercial hunting of black-skins, signalised the rosy dawn of the era of capitalist pro- duction. As late a? Thus, the equation, 20 yards of linen =1 coat, becomes 20 yards of linen=2 coats, either, because the value of the linen has doubled, or because the value of the coat has fallen by one-half; and it becomes 20 yards of linen = % coat, either, because the value of the linen has fallen by one- half, or because the value of the coat has doubled. Comm., V. Rep., p. On the other hand, the land, in spite of its constant "relative surplus-population," is at the same time under-populated. 59, 60. of Insp. In order 1 K. 3 Mr. Peel, he moans, took with him from England to Swan River, West Australia, means of subsistence and of production to the amount of £50,000. As arts are cultivated, and civilisation is extended, fixed capital bears a larger and larger proportion to circulating capital. . The effect of this system ... Harrup sum- moned 19 women and girls before the magistrates for breach of contract. The simple circulation of com- modities — selling in order to buy — is a means of carrying out a purpose unconnected with circulation, namely, the appropria- tion of use-values, the satisfaction of wants. =3s. c, p. 1 Now in order to allow of these elements actually functioning as capital, the capitalist class requires additional labour. He begins, post festum, with the results of the process of development ready to hand before him. He always gives 12 hours of labour. 1 Owing to the excessive labour of their workpeople, both adult and non-adult, certain London houses where newspapers and books are printed, have got the ill-omened name of "slaughter-houses." 2 Similar ex- cesses are practised in book-binding, where the victims are chiefly women, girls, and children; young persons have to do heavy work in rope-walks and night-work in salt mines, candle manufacto- ries, and chemical works; young people are worked to death at turning the looms in silk weaving, when it is not carried on by machinery. Of the Prussian operative he says: "He receives a remuneration sufficient to procure the simple fare, and to supply the slender comforts to which he has been accustomed ... The Statute of Labourers was passed at the urgent instance of the House of Commons. is true that with the substitution of manufacture for handicrafts, traces of the exploitation of children begin to appear. of this book it will be seen that this effect of machinery, which, as we have seen, is represented to be a com- pensation to the working-class, is on the contrary a most frightful scourge. 2 "Public Health, eighth report, 1866," p. An example, on the most colossal scale, of this movement is afforded by the production of wearing apparel. His soul is the soul of capital. the earn- ings of the operatives rise and fall with the quality of the cotton mixings; sometimes they have been within 15 per cent, of former earnings, and then, in a week or two, they have fallen off from 50 to 60 per cent." 4 These experiments were not made solely at the expense of the workman's means of subsistence. 4 4 8 " 9. E.] VARIOUS FORMULAE FOR RATE OF SURPLUS-VALUE 533 the estimate of L. 2 Ure, 1. c, p. We now know what portion of the value of the yarn is ow- ing to the cotton and the spindle. to 8.30 in the evening another set were "put to," &c. Must we, for such a tempo- rary inconvenience, abolish the use of the knife? In money-lenders' capital the form M — C — M' is reduced to the two extremes with- out a mean, M — M', money exchanged for more money, a form that is incompatible with the nature of money, and therefore remains inexplicable from the standpoint of the circulation of commodities. Capital now entered upon a preliminary campaign in order to hinder the Act from coming into full force on May 1st, 1848. 191. Independently of this, a radical change takes place in the composition of the collective labourer, a change of the persons working in combination. 183.) 2 "When a man is in want of a demand, does Mr. Malthus recommend him to pay some other person to take off his goods?" is a question put by an angry disciple of Ricardo to Malthus, who, like his disciple, Parson Chal- mers, economically glorifies this class of simple buyers or consumers. 15, 41, 96, 97, 55, 57, 69.— Jacob Vanderlint, as early as 1734, declared that the secret of the out-cry of the capitalists a.s to the laziness of the working people was simply that they claimed for the same wages 6 days' labour instead of 4. . but whoever takes more or better than he gives, that is usury, and is not service, but wrong done to his neighbour, as when one steals and robs. . Rep.," p. Their brain ceased to think, their eyes to see. 1 The bourgeois capitalists favoured the operation with the view, among others, to promoting free trade in land, to extending the domain of modern agriculture on the large farm-system, and to increasing their supply of the free agricultural proletarians ready to hand. 710.) "What is the general feeling in the district ... It cannot be otherwise in a mode of production in which the labourer exists to satisfy the needs of self-expansion of existing values, instead of, on the contrary, ma- terial wealth existing to satisfy the needs of development on the part of the labourer. The manufacturer is responsible for compliance with the Act. 443, 444.) "Do the men take a great interest in this question (of edu- cation)?" "The majority of them do." (n. 622 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION (shown rather qualitatively in the goodness than quantitatively in the mass of their products), the degree of productivity of labour, in a given society, is expressed in the relative extent of the means of production that one labourer, during a given time, with the same tension of labour-power, turns into products. 1 Our friend, Moneybags, who as yet is only an embryo cap- italist, must buy his commodities at their value, must sell them at their value, and yet at the end of the process must withdraw more value from circulation than he threw into it at starting. This "delicate" parson, from whose work just quoted, as well as from his "Jour- ney through Spain," Malthus often copies whole pages, himself borrowed the greater part of his doctrine from Sir James Steuart, whom he however al- ters in the borrowing. . m. 4 The development of the factory system fixes a constantly increasing portion of the capital in a form, in which, on the one hand, its value is capable of continual self-expansion, and in which, on the other hand, it loses both use- value and exchange-value whenever it loses contact with living labour. CO-OPERATION 327 Although a number of men may be occupied together at the same time on the same, or the same kind of work, yet the labour of each, as a part of the collective labour, may correspond to a distinct phase of the labour-process, through all whose phases, in conse- quence of co-operation, the subject of their labour passes with great- er speed. This grows with the wealth of civil society. All other things being equal, the mass and value of the product will rise in direct proportion to the labour expended. The movements of the individual capitals, and of the personal rev- enues, cross and intermingle and are lost in the general change of places, in the circulation of the wealth of society; this dazes the sight, and propounds very complicated problems for solution. c, pp. is bracin 280 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION from 5.30 a. Apart from natural exhaustion through age, &c, I must be able on the morrow to work with the same normal amount of force, health and freshness as to-day. 122.) But now comes Carey, and cries out upon England, surely not with unreason, that it is trying to turn every other country into a mere agricultural nation, whose manufacturer is to be England. Thus: Sheep in 1865, 3,688,742, but in 1856, 3,694,294. The seller of the Bible, who prefers something to warm his inside, no more thought of exchanging his Bible for linen than our weaver knew that wheat had been exchanged for his linen. "If," says Wakefield, "all the members of the society are sup- posed to possess equal portions of capital ... Hence the perfectly rational revolt in 1860 of the London labourers, employed in the building trades, against the attempt of the capitalists to impose on them this sort of wage by the hour. The continuance of this relation demands that the owner of the labour-power should sell it only for a definite period, for if he were to sell it rump and stump, once for all, he would be selling himself, converting himself from a free man into a slave, from an owner of a commodity into a commodity. . 904.) 2 "L'echange est de sa nature un contrat d'egalite qui se iait de valeur pour valeur egale. 3 Hence legislation in various countries fixes a maximum for labour- contracts. 4 As an exam- ple of the method 5 obtaining in the 19th century, the "clearing" made by the Duchess of Sutherland will suffice here. The repre- sentative of the clan, its chief or "great man," was only the titu- lar owner of this property, just as the Queen of England is the titular owner of all the national soil. Modern Industry, indeed, compels society, under pen- alty of death, to replace the detail-worker of to-day, crippled by life-long repetition of one and the same trivial operation, and thus reduced to the mere fragment of a man, by the fully developed individual, fit for a variety of labours, ready to face any change of production, and to whom the different social functions he per- forms, are but so many modes of giving free scope to his own natu- ral and acquired powers. Since then, every pre- tended obstruction to business has been treated by the Factory inspectors as a mere sham. In the trade between the markets of the world, the value of commodities is expressed so as to be univer- sally recognised. * b. m. Since the production of surplus-value is the chief end and aim of capitalist production, it is clear, that the greatness of a man's or a nation's wealth should be measured, not by the absolute quantity produced, but by the relative magnitude of the surplus- produce. Hence the enigmat- ical character of the equivalent form which escapes the notice of the bourgeois political economist, until this form, completely developed, confronts him in the shape of money. MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 395 place, not only of the children's play, but also of free labour at home within moderate limits for the support of the family. "Very many of us think," says a leader of July 2nd, 1863, "that, while we work our own young women to death, using the scourge of starvation, instead of the crack of the whip, as the instrument of compulsion, we have scarcely a right to hound on fire and slaughter against families who were born slave-owners, and who, at least, feed their slaves well, and work them lightly." In the same manner, the Standard, a Tory organ, fell foul of the Rev. off the re- maining 9s. In 16 of the houses visited, only 1 man that earned 10s. systematically deluding and leading them (the labourers) astray in order to render their muscular powers entirely mechanical and obedient." (W. 3 Although this absence of regularity in the expenditure of labour-power is 1 "Rep. At a certain point their labour-power failed. Then they employed slaves in agriculture and cattle-breed- ing, because freemen would have been taken from labour for military serv- ice. On the other hand, however, this extra surplus-value vanishes, so soon as the new method of production has become general, and has consequently caused the difference be- tween the individual value of the cheapened commodity and its social value to vanish. Death-rate per 100,000 men in the respective industries between the stated ages. THE WORKING-DAY 257 the inherent tendency of capitalist production. 3 But what avails lamentation in the face of historical necessity? 1 Let us now return to our would-be capitalist. 3,983,880 No. 31,927 Acres. . That form is x Commodity A = y Commodity B. 8, 9. The despotic bell calls him from his bed, calls him from breakfast and dinner. 165, 166.) 3 Machine printing also economises colour. 1 18 persons George Street, No. 130 . Hence, the pro- ductive power developed by the labourer when working in co-oper- ation, is the productive power of capital. We saw, in the first place, that the original conversion of a sum of values into capital was achieved in complete accordance with the laws of exchange. She gets the young ones ready for school. Elementary or Accidental form of value x commodity A=y commodity B, or x commodity A is worth y commodity B. It is with him as it is with a conqueror who sees in every new country annexed, only a new boundary. 897.) 3 "Chaque vendeur ne peut done parvenir a rencherir habituellement ses marchandises, qu'en se soumettant aussi a payer habituellement plus cher les marchandises des autres vendeurs; et par la meme raison, chaque consommateur ne peut payer habituellement moins cher ce qu'il achete, qu'en se soumettant aussi a une diminution semblable sur le prix des choses qu'il vend." (Merrier de la Riviere, 1. But what distinguishes the worst architect from the best of bees is this, that the architect raises his structure in imagination be- fore he erects it in reality. ... c, pp. SIMULTANEOUS VARIATIONS IN THE DURATION, PRODUCTIVENESS, AND INTENSITY OF LABOUR It is obvious that a large number of combinations are here possible. 3.) "Wages are decreased in the same proportion as the powers of production increase. If the growth of the quantity produced is occasionally mentioned, this is only done with reference to the greater abundance of use-values. The average intensity of labour changes from country to country; here it is greater, there less. * 1. in the shop. Several did not contain an atom of morphia. Annual increase per cent, of the population of England and Wales in decimal numbers: 1811-1821 1.533 per cent. . . Sheep were introduced into glens which had been the seats of communities of small farmers; and the latter were driven to seek subsistence on coarser and more sterile tracks of soil. m.; then it might attend for 3 or 4 days consecutively, or for a week, then it would not appear in school for 3 weeks or a month, after that upon some odd days at some odd hours when the opera- tive who employed it chose to spare it; and thus the child was, as it were, buffeted from school to work, from work to school, until the tale of 150 hours was told." 1 By the excessive addition of women and children to the ranks of the workers, machinery at last breaks down the resistance which the male operatives in the manufacturing period continued to oppose to the despotism of capital. SECTION 9.— THE FACTORY ACTS. * In treating of Co-operation and Manufacture, it was shown that certain general factors of production, such as buildings, are, in comparison with the scattered means of production of the isolated workman, economised by being consumed in common, and that they therefore make the product cheaper. If his work is defective in quality, the penalty falls on him, if less in quantity than the minimum fixed for a given time, he is dismissed and an abler operative procured." (Ure, I. But let us anticipate. According as the wooden hut contains 1, 2, or 3 holes, its inhabitant, navvy, or whatever he may be, has to pay 1, 3, or 4 shillings weekly. And lastly, it serves as the universally recognised embodiment of social wealth, whenever the question is not of buying or paying, but of transferring wealth from one country to another, and whenever this transference in the form of commodities is rendered impossible, either by special conjunc- tures in the markets, or by the purpose itself that is intended. 13, 14.) 1 Hence the absurdity of every law prescribing that the banks of a country shall form reserves of that precious metal alone which circulates at home. 690. . But the change, which the value of the commodity undergoes in this process, is limited to a change in its money-form. To-mor- row, like a swarm of locusts, come crowding in masses of ragged Irishmen or decayed English agricultural labourers. His 20 yards of linen has a definite price, £2. As simple reproduction constantly reproduces the capital-relation itself, i.e., the relation of capitalists on the one hand, and wage- workers on the other, so reproduction on a progressive scale, i.e., accumu- lation, reproduces the capital-relation on a progressive scale, more capitalists or larger capitalists at this pole, more wage- workers at that. We now proceed to distinguish the co-operation of a number of machines of one kind from a complex system of machinery. Gold is now money with reference to all other commodities only because it was previously, with reference to them, a simple commodity. But there is unhappily evidence that those horrors continue as intense as they were. Under these circumstances, tout sera pour le mieux dans le meilleur des mondes possibles. For instance, it is a contradiction to depict one body as constantly falling towards another, and as, at the same time, constantly flying away from it. Garnier, his French translator and commentator, who, under the first French Empire, quite naturally developed into a senator, quite as naturally opposes him on this point. Instead of being cheapened, the product is made dearer in proportion to the value of the machine. .< 430,535 „ 105 „ 584,458 m 122 u 646,377 „ 26 „ 736,448 „ 28 „ 262,610 „ 3 „ 264,528 „ 3 1 „ England, a country with fully developed capitalist produc- tion, and pre-eminently industrial, would have bled to death with such a drain of population as Ireland has suffered. The product of this process belongs, therefore, to him, just as much as does the wine which is the product of a process of fermentation completed in his cellar. Here the regulations are brought closer than before to those of No. 1, but there are still several exceptions which favour the capitalists and which in certain cases may be expanded by special per- mission of the Home Secretary. Compelled by practical necessity, they thus have had to take into account the national difference in the intensity of labour, but this has brought them no loss. 284 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION the workers themselves, under the pretence that they had been taught by experience, were to help in the destruction of their own work. It is true that a carriage cannot be gilt before it has been made. The exportation of the coin is caused by its cheapness, and is not the effect, but the cause of an unfavourable balance," already occurs in Barbon: "The Bal- ance of Trade, if there be one, is not the cause of sending away the money out of a nation; but that proceeds from the difference of the value of bullion in every country." (N. —The working miners want a law for the compulsory education of their children, as in factories. 458 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION amount of size, both animal and vegetable, is used. The most essential condition to the production of machines by machines was a prime mover capable of exerting any amount of force, and yet under perfect control. . of 1840 stocking making was still done by manual labour. 4 'England and America/' Lond., 1833, Vol I., p 47. to 10s. . 1 This portion of value which is added by the machinery, decreases both absolutely and relatively, when the machinery does away with horses and other animals that are employed as mere moving forces, and not as ma- chines for changing the form of matter. is the sole end of trade." (J. 1 This expenditure of labour-power comes to him gratis. aX^ in' ipy<? 3 As to any further reduc- tion of his income, he may say, nihil habeo nihil euro. c, p. c, pp. 44 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION may possibly not take place without friction, but take place it must. c, p. On the other hand, during the same twenty years, the number of large farms in- creased; those of 300-500 acres rose from 7,771 to 8,410, those of more than 500 acres from 2,755 to 3,914, those of more than 1,000 acres from 492 to 582. The remaining T^ths or 6s. i, art. A larger portion of the prod- uce of society is changed into surplus-produce, and a larger part of the surplus-produce is supplied for consumption in a multi- plicity of refined shapes. Dr. Hunter remarks: "Now these poor must come from somewhere, and as there is no particular attraction, such as doles, at Bad- sey, it must be repulsion from some other unfit place, which will send them here. Eden, philanthropist and tory, to boot. The development of Modern Industry, therefore, cuts from under its feet, the very foundation on which the bourgeoisie produces and appropriates products. On the other hand, the mass of machinery, beasts of burden, mineral manures, drain-pipes, &c, is a condition of the increasing productivity of labour. Working in moderation, he is, in fact, in one of the best of human positions, physically speaking. That which holds good of the means of subsistence holds with the raw materials of industry 1 In his "Notions de Philosophie Naturelle." Paris, 1838. We now come to a ticklish point; therefore, attention! The last working- hour but one is, like the first, an ordinary working-hour, neither THE RATE OF SURPLUS-VALUE 227 more nor less. The whole mass of the vein must therefore be crushed and the gold either washed out or extracted by means of mercury. The latter kind is due to the elements. 14.) 728 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION proportion between arable land and pasture had to be established. Here the capitalist regime has either directly conquered the whole domain of national production, or, where economic conditions are less developed, it, at least, indirectly controls those strata of society which, though belonging to the antiquated mode of production, continue to exist side by side with it in gradual decay. He would, besides, only require the means of production sufficient for 8 work- ing-hours. . .by adopting expedients, the secret of which only the labourer knows; by reducing his daily rations; by substituting rye-bread for wheat; by eating less meat, or even none at all, and the same with butter and condiments; by content- ing themselves with one or two rooms where the family is crammed together, where boys and girls sleep side by side, often on the same pallet; by economy of clothing, washing, decency; by giving up the Sunday diversions; by, in short, resigning them- selves to the most painful privations. Oct. The value so advanced has not expanded, no surplus-value has been created, and consequently money has not been converted into capital. 2 "Reports, &c, for 31 Oct., 1862," p. 211.) 2 "The improvements which took place not long ago in frames for making patent netwereso great that a machine in good repair which had cost £1,200, sold a few years after for £60 . Of these only 4,063 were, according to the Parliamentary Return of the 11th February, 1862, working under the Factory Acts. 14, note. 80, n. 2 Classical Political Economy borrowed from every-day life the category "price of labour" without further criticism, and then sim- ply asked the question, how is this price determined? 434 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION machine in place of the second carding, had considerably reduced the number of hands formerly employed in the carding-room." Another spinning-mill is estimated to effect a saving of labour of 10%. In the one case, the product is entirely made by a single ma- chine, which performs all the various operations previously done by one handicraftsman with his tool; as, for instance, by a weav- er with his loom; or by several handicraftsmen successively, either separately or as members of a system of Manufacture. If, now, the working- 1 "There are compensating circumstances ... The longer the life of the machine in the labour-process, the greater is that difference. Both parts of the labour-time exist, therefore, independently, side by side one with the other. The steam-engine itself, such as it wa« at its invention, during the manufacturing period at the close of the 17th century, and such as it continued to be down to 1780, a did not give rise to any industrial revolution. But the people did not wish to go away, and managed even to increase under these circumstances. So far, therefore, as his actions are a mere function of capital — endowed as capital is, in his person, with consciousness and a will— his own private consumption is a robbery perpetrated on ac- cumulation, just as in book-keeping by double entry, the private expenditure of the capitalist is placed on the debtor side of his account against his capital. One of the new taxes devised at Washington during the civil war, was the duty of 6% "on all industrial products." Question: What is an industrial product? If worker B is paid out of the surplus-value which worker A produced, then, in the first place, A furnished that sur- plus-value without having the just price of his commodity cut by a halfpenny, and, in the second place, the transaction is no concern of B's whatever. (7 .) Huntingdon Hartford had, in 1851, 87 houses; shortly after this, 19 cot- tages were destroyed in this small parish of 1,720 acres; popu- lation in 1831, 452; in 1852, 832; and in 1861, 341. 1 16 North Street, No. 17 ... of coal per horse-power per hour during 60 hours, and in- clusive of that consumed in heating the mill), 11 tons a week at 8s. And as extractive industry and agriculture supply manufacturing industry with its raw materials and those of its instruments of labour, the additional product the former have created without additional advance of capital, tells also in fa- vour of the latter. 1 At all events, less than a natural day. Paris vaut bien une messe. c, 57, p. 2 "Rep. (Prof, of Polit. (b.) QuantltatiTe determination of Relative value Every commodity, whose value it is intended to express, is a useful object of given quantity, as 15 bushels of corn, or 100 lbs. The inhabitants do not go beyond the same or the next parish, parting their two-room tenements into single rooms, and crowding even those. Let the ordinary working-day contain 12 hours of which 6 are paid, 6 unpaid. Od.-r£3 lis. By the simple addition of a certain quantity of labour, new value is added, and by the quality of this added labour, the orig- inal values of the means of production are preserved in the prod- uct. . We saw that on the one side the posses- sor of value or money, on the other, the possessor of the value-creat- ing substance; on the one side, the possessor of the means of pro- duction and subsistence, on the other, the possessor of nothing but labour-power, must confront one another as buyer and seller. The work was to go on between 6 a. . 8 1. Yet, in the form of circulation now under consideration, such differences in value are purely accidental. CHANGES OF MAGNITUDE 523 weight, which the pressure of capital on the one side, and the resistance of the labourer on the other, throws into the scale. It means only this, that many millions of workpeople would be required to replace the spinning machinery. The very polarity of these forms makes them mutually exclusive. This concrete labour becomes, therefore, the medium for expressing abstract human labour. Hence, in determining the value of the yarn, or the labour- time required for its production, all the special processes carried on at various times and in different places, which were necessary, first to produce the cotton and the wasted portion of the spindle, and then with the cotton and spindle to spin the yarn, may to- gether be looked on as different and successive phases of one and the same process. Once in the midst of this world of adventurers, who change their occupation as often as they do their shirt, egad, I did as the others. 119.) This passage shows, at one and the same time, the strength and the weakness of that kind of criticism which knows how to judge and condemn the present, but not how to compre- hend it. 3 It is of no avail to deduce the exchange of more labour against less, from their difference of form, the one being realised, the other living. xiii.) 266 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION But the value of the labour-power includes the value of the commodities necessary for the reproduction of the worker, or for the keeping up of the working-class. The distinction between them is, that one buys and the other sells. These facts manifest themselves at first by products as a general rule taking the form of commodities. . You and I know on the market only one law, that of the exchange of com- modities. Thos a French poet of the period enumerates amongst the goods to be found in the market of Landit, not only clothing, shoes, leather, agricultural implements, &c, but also "femmes lolles de leur corps." 2 Proudhon begins by taking his ideal of justice, of "justice eternelle," from the juridical relations that correspond to the production of commodi- ties: thereby, it may be noted, he proves, to the consolation of all good citi- zens, that the production of commodities is a form of production as everlasting as justice. As the taste of the porridge does not tell you who grew the oats, no more does this simple process tell you of itself what are the social conditions under which it is taking place, wheth- er under the slave-owner's brutal lash, or the anxious eye of the capitalist, whether Cincinnatus carries it on in tilling his modest farm or a savage in killing wild animals with stones. Such does a usurer, and sits the while safe on his stool, when he ought rather to be hanging on the gallows, and be eaten by as many ravens as he has stolen guilders, if only there were so much flesh on him, that so many ravens could stick their beaks in and share it. Cairnes. La valeur du travail est une expression figuree, " &c, I have re- marked: "Dans le travail-marchandise qui est d'une realite effrayante, il (Proudhon) ne voit qu'une ellipse grammaticale. "Men were then forced to work" [i.e., to work gratis for others], "because they were slaves of others; men are now forced to work" [i.e., to work gratis for non- workers] "because they are the slaves of their necessities," he does not thence conclude, like the fat holder of benefices, that the wage-labourer must always go fasting. The Factory Inspectors appealed to the Law Courts. 2 "It is the aim of the capitalist to obtain with his expended capital the greatest possible quantity of labour (d'obtenir du capital depense la plus Forte somme de travail possible)." J. But if Englishmen are to be eternal drudges, 'tis to be feared they will degenerate below the Frenchmen. 42.) 559 CHAPTER XXII NATIONAL DIFFERENCES OF WAGES In the 17th chapter we were occupied with the manifold combi- nations which may bring about a change in magnitude of the value of labour-power — this magnitude being considered either abso- lutely or relatively, i.e., as compared with surplus-value; whilst on the other hand, the quantum of the means of subsistence in which the price of labour is realised might again undergo fluctuations in- dependent of, or different from, the changes of this price. Now, money has other functions besides this one, and the isolated function of serving as the mere circulating medium is not necessarily the only one attached to gold coin, although this 1 The following passage from Fullarton shows the want of clearness on the part of even the best writers on money, in their comprehension of its various functions: "That, as far as concerns our domestic exchanges, all the MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OF COMMODITIES 129 is the case with those abraded coins that continue to circulate. of linen must have the same value as one coat. of tea =% a ton of iron. gentleman [Mr. Villiers, President of the Poor Law Board] with a view of obtaining poor children from certain union houses for the mills of Lancashire." * 1 1. 2 "Productive consumption ... 3 The problem is in no way simplified by introducing irrele- vant matters after the manner of Col. 59. Therefore, when we speak of the progress of social ac- cumulation we tacitly include — to-day — the effects of centrali- sation. From what has gone before, we know that surplus- value is purely the result of a variation in the value of v, of that portion of the capital which is transformed into labour-power; con- sequently, v-fs=v+v' or v plus an increment of v. But suppose the seller of the Bible turns the £2 set free by the weaver into brandy M— C, the concluding phase of C— M— C (linen, money, Bible), is also C — M, the first phase of C — M — G (Bible, money, brandy). Every crevice is topped to maintain warmth, and in an atmosphere of dia- bolic odour, with a mud floor, with his only clothes drying on his back, he often sups and sleeps with his wife and children. Remarks, pp. 1 Anew type of workman springs into life along with the machine, namely, its maker. In this way Political Economy expected to penetrate athwart the acciden- tal prices of labour, to the value of labour. After the fruitfulness of the Irish soil had been praised from 1815 to 1846, and proclaimed loudly as by Nature herself destined for the cultivation of wheat, English agronomists, economists, politicians, discover suddenly that it is good for nothing but to produce forage. As to man, his bodily height lessens if his due growth is interfered with, either by phys- ical or social conditions. The labour-time that yesterday was without doubt socially necessary to the production of a yard of linen, ceases to be so to-day, a fact which the owner of the money is only too eager to prove from the prices quoted by our friend's competitors. 464 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION hours, often longer, than the adults. Hence it furnishes to capital an inexhaustible reservoir of disposable labour-power. c, p. In hand- icrafts and manufacture, the workman makes use of a tool, in the factory, the machine makes use of him. The exchange of commodities is therefore accompanied by the following changes in their form. To say nothing of more recent times, have the agricultural population received a farthing of compen- sation for the 3,511,770 acres of common land which between 1801 and 1831 were stolen from them and by parliamentary de- vices presented to the landlords by the landlords? Comm., III. 180, 182. It was, of course, far more convenient, and much more in conform- ity with the interests of the ruling classes, whom Malthus adored like a true priest, to explain this "over-population" by the eternal laws of Nature, rather than by the historical laws of capitalist production. A, for instance, cannot be "your majesty" to B, unless at the same time majesty in B's eyes assumes the bodily form of A, and, what is more, with every 1 The celebrated Franklin, one of the first economists, after Wm. Petty, who saw through the nature of value, says: "Trade in general being nothing else but the exchange of labour for labour, the value of all things is ... Neither lies, bribery, nor threats were spared in this attempt. There remain eight shillings, which are the expression in money, of the value newly created dur- ing the working-day. In the continuous and unvarying process of glazing are found girls of 12 who work the whole month 14 hours a day, "without any regular relief or cessation beyond 2 or, at most, 3 breaks of half an hour each for meals." In some mills, where regular night-work has been entire- ly given up, over-work goes on to a terrible extent, "and that often in the dirtiest, and in the hottest, and in the most monotonous of the various processes." ("Ch. Employment Comm. Hence the writers of the manufacturing period treat the division of labour chiefly as a means of virtually supplying a deficiency of labourers, and not as a means of actually displac- ing those in work. The dull compulsion of economic relations completes the subjection of the labourer to the capitalist. With the accumulation of capital, therefore, the specifically capitalistic mode of production develops, and with the capital- ist mode of production the accumulation of capital. Before he had time to get his tea, he was again called on for duty.... But when surplus-value has to be pro- duced by the conversion of necessary labour into surplus-labour, it by no means suffices for capital to take over the labour-process in the form under which it has been historically handed down, and then simply to prolong the duration of that process. It is, in reality, much easier to discover by analysis the earthly core of the misty creations of religion, than, conversely, it is, to develop from the actual relations of life the corresponding celestial- MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 373 All fully developed machinery consists of three essentially different parts, the motor mechanism, the transmitting mechanism, and finally the tool or working machine. "If," says Harrison, "the old records of euerie manour be sought ... Everything produced by him was exclusively the result of his own personal labour, and therefore simply an object of use for himself. iii.). This system, says Commissioner Lord, "seems to combine all the evils of both the 12 hours' and the 24 hours' relays." Children under 13, young persons under 18, and women, work under this night system. E.g., the barbarity in the treatment of the paupers, at which the English Press (The Times, Pall Mall Gazette, etc.) have cried out so loudly during the last two years, is of ancient date. ac- cording to the season of the year, or the amount and nature of their master's business; while others are again engaged in the bakehouse in 'bringing out' more batches until late in the afternoon. the sum of £510.The surplus-value is therefore in this case £510— £430 =£80. With suppressed irony, and in very well weighed words, the Factory Inspectors hint that the actual law also frees the capitalist from some of the brutality natural to a man who is a mere embodiment of capital, and that it has given him time for a little "culture." "Formerly the master had no time for anything but money; the servant had no time for anything but labour" (1. Gold (or silver) is therefore money. So long as the Republic lasted, the mass of the English people of all grades rose from the degradation into which they had sunk under the Tudors. Variable capital is therefore only a particular historical form of appearance of the fund for providing the necessaries of life, or the labour-fund which the labourer requires for the maintenance of himself and family, and which, whatever be the system of social production, he must himself produce and reproduce. Burke, 1. ii., p. And yet we have seen that simple reproduction suffices to stamp this first operation, in so far as it is conceived as an isolated process, with a totally changed character. Hence wage-labourers cannot co- operate, unless they are employed simultaneously by the same cap- ital, the same capitalist, and unless therefore their labour-powers are bought simultaneously by him. It must be remarked further, that if in the prisons it is necessary to set down in the account the expenses of administration and surveil- lance, on the other hand, the prisoners have not to pay for their lodging; that the purchases they make at the canteens are not in- cluded in the expenses of maintenance, and that these expenses are greatly lowered in consequence of the large number of per- sons that make up the establishments, and of contracting for or buying wholesale, the food and other things that enter into their consumption. "Is there anything that you are aware of to account for the necessity of feeding them very much better than ordinary la- bourers? "I thought," he says, "I was in the spirit before the Judge of the Universe." "Who art thou?" asked a voice. is at Is., and increase regularly till bread is Is. 5d.; when it is above that sum, decrease regularly till it be at 2s., and then his food should be-^-th less." 1 Before the Com- mittee of Inquiry of the House of Lords, 1814, a certain A. 1636.) "Why should you distinguish them (colliery boys) from other boys?" "Because I think they are an exception to the rule." (n. m. "Illi unum consilium habent et virtutem et potestatem suam bestise tradunt. The class of wage-labourers, essential to these, is wanting. That labourer alone is produc- tive, who produces surplus-value for the capitalist, and thus works for the self-expansion of capital. The quantity of the cir- culating medium may decrease, owing to the number of commodi- ties decreasing more rapidly; or to the velocity of currency increas- ing more rapidly, than prices rise. But even in Modern Industry the continual improvement of machin- ery, and the development of the automatic system, has an anal- ogous effect. This is precisely the reason why the product of his labour serves him solely as exchange-value. All the conditions for carrying on the labour-process are suddenly converted into so many acts of abstinence on the part of the capitalist. 181: "If we examine the whole labour-process, from the point of view of its result, it is plain that both the instruments and the subject of labour are means of production, and that the labour itself is productive labour." And in Note 2, same page, we further added: "This method of determining, from the standpoint of the labour- process alone, what is productive labour, is by no means directly applicable to the case of the capitalist process of production." We now proceed to the further development of this subject. Hence, instead of saying: A quarter of wheat is worth an ounce of gold; we say, it is worth £3 17s. 135. Ill Report, 1864," p. H. But it will yield, during equal periods of time, dif- ferent quantities of values in use; more, if the productive power rise, fewer, if it fall. The comple- tion of the task within the proper time depends on the simultane- ous application of numerous combined working-days; the amount of useful effect depends on the number of labourers; this number, however, is always smaller than the number of isolated labourers required to do the same amount of work in the same period. If turbulence and strife will bring a profit, it will freely encourage both. . 472 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION ing, shoemaking, sewing, hat-making, and many others, is the sewing-machine. G. The scene and language while this market is going on are quite disgraceful." 1 It has also occurred in England, that women have taken "children from the workhouse and let any one have them out for 2s. c, pp. 1 "Essay on the Rate of Wages: with an Examination of the Causes of the Differences in the Condition of the Labouring Population throughout the World," Philadelphia, 1835. become independent landowners, if not competitors with their former masters in the labour-market." 3 Think of the horror! The excellent capitalist has imported bodily from Europe, with his own good money, his own competitors! The end of the world has come! No wonder Wakefield laments the absence of all dependence and of all sentiment of dependence on the part of the wage-workers in the colonies. . DIVISION OF LABOUR AND MANUFACTURE 341 he is tied to one and the same operation all day long; they vanish in proportion as the changes in his work diminish. 20. 8 S Laing, ]. of yarn contained no cotton at all, and the whole \ 20 lbs. By a Fellow of the University College of Oxford,** London, 1815. de Mo- linari, 1. We see mighty coral reefs rising from the depths of the ocean into islands and firm land, yet each individual depositor is puny, weak, and contemptible. Realisation of the surplus-value nec- essarily carries with it the refunding of the value that was ad- vanced. Nor is it quite fair thus to maintain in idleness a number of persons, only to pinch others, who are likely, from their characters, if you can force them to work, to work with success." 1 Unfair as he finds it to spur on the industrial capitalist, by depriving his bread of its butter, yet he thinks it necessary to reduce the labourer's wages to a minimum "to keep him industrious." Nor does he for a moment conceal the fact, that the appropriation of unpaid labour is the secret of surplus-value. The Duchess, in the nobility of her heart, actually went so far as to let these at an average rent of 2s. But whether the material factors of the process are of normal quality or not, depends not upon the labourer, but entirely upon the capitalist. to 10 p. Henceforth we shall con- sider the value of gold to be given, as, in fact, it'is momentarily whenever we estimate the price of a commodity. or of 6x500 working-hours. 26, n 125, p. Like all other great modern industries, it constantly produces, by incessant fluctuations, a relative surplus-population within its own sphere, even with an absolute increase in the mass of human beings absorbed by it. un- der 12, and after March 1st, 1836, no child under 13, was to work more than eight hours in a factory. The value in circulation has not increased by one iota, it is only distributed differently between A and B. 919), which amounts to saying "qu'une valeur vaut plus qu'une valeur egale. In 1851, 252 persons inhabited 61 houses, but in 1861, 262 per- sons were squeezed into 49 houses. 1 We see then, that, apart from extremely elastic bounds, the nature of the exchange of commodities itself imposes no limit to the working-day, no limit to surplus-labour. 238, 249, 261, 262. 4 In 1860 the people expropriated by force were exported to Canada un- der false pretences. . Messrs. Accidental circumstances here play so great a part, that these two forms of labour sometimes change places. Hence the negro labour in the Southern States of the American Union preserved something of a patriarchal character, so long as production was chiefly directed to immediate local consumption. LENGTH OF THE WORKING-DAY AND INTENSITY OF LABOUR CONSTANT, PRODUCTIVENESS OF LABOUR VARIABLE On these assumptions the value of labour-power, and the magnitude of surplus-value, are determined by three laws. 398 ts ,976 . Rept.," p. But in the case of increased productiveness, a given value is spread over a greater mass of products. We overlook the facts that gold, when a mere commodity, is not money, and that when other commodities express their prices in gold, this gold is but the money-form of those commodities themselves. 1 "Half the girls of Ludford have been ruined by going out" (in gangs). The general value-form, which represents all products of labour as mere congelations of undifferentiated human labour, shows by its very structure that it is the social resume of the world of commodities. . The whole system of capitalist production is based on the fact that the workman sells his labour-power as a commodity. No doubt, the commodity appears here under two different aspects. Dr. Farre expressed himself still more coarsely. 12.) This book is very inter- esting. c, p. The Pha- risee of a capitalist represented by one of his servants, accompanies this action, of course, with the unctuous phrase: "That's for mother," yet he knows well enough that the poor children must sit up and help. The creation of surplus-value, and therefore the conversion of money into capital, can consequently be explained neither on the assumption that commodities are sold above their value, nor that they are bought below their value. . It has, therefore, lost value more or less. The price-form, however, is not only compatible with the possibility of a quantitative incongruity between magnitude of value and price, i.e., between the former and its expression in money, but it may also conceal a qualitative inconsistency, so much so, that, although money is nothing but the value-form of commodities, price ceases altogether to express value. This result becomes inevitable from the moment there is a free sale, by the labourer himself, of labour-power as a commodity. et s'approprient tous les bienfaits qui resultent de la diminution des frais du travail, de l'abondance des productions, et du bon marche des consommations. CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO CAPITAL 587 However long a series of periodical reproductions and preced- ing accumulations the capital functioning to-day may have passed through, it always preserves its original virginity. 250, 251.) - La concen- tration des instruments de production et la division du travail sont aussi inseparables Tune de l'autre que le sont, dans le regime politique, la concentra- tion des pouvoirs publics et la division des inte>ets priv£s." (Karl Marx, I. In the healthiest situations, on hill sides fronting the sea, the faces of their famished children are as pale as they could be in the foul atmosphere of a London alley. But where a particular rate of piece-wage has for a long time been fixed by tradition, and its lowering, therefore, presented especial difficulties, the masters, in such exceptional cases, sometimes had recourse to its compulsory transformation into time-wages. of tea = ] 40 lbs. 37. 3 3 6 - 6. The same causes which develop the expansive power of capital, develop also the labour- power at its disposal. MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 449 loom, which previously had been worked by the power of men. 206.) 2 In reference to this statute, J. Therefore things tljat are relatively 1 "If silver never exceed what is wanted tor the smaller payments, it cannot be collected in sufficient quantities ioi the larger payments ... For instance, how is the fact to be expressed that weaving creates the value of the linen, not by virtue of being weaving, as such, but by reason of its general property of being human labour? It was natural to think that, in an exchange, value was given for value, whenever each of the articles exchanged was of equal value with the same quantity of gold. This is the way in which the engrossing of farms naturally operates. So much greater therefore can be the excess of his labour for others over his labour for himself. But both these limiting conditions are of a very elastic nature, and allow the greatest latitude. The cheapened commodity, of course, causes only a pro tanto fall in the value of labour-power, a fall proportional to the extent of that commodity's employment in the reproduction of labour- power. But now the 36 lbs. 468 " mother " " " " " 89 " 267 " boy " " " " " 56 " 168 " gir] " " " " " 55 " 165 Total fr. xvi., n. 1 Classical economy grasped this fact so thoroughly that Adam Smith, Ricardo, &c, as mentioned earlier, inaccurately identi- fied accumulation with the consumption, by the productive labourers, of all the capitalised part of the surplus-product, or with its transformation into additional wage-labourers. But the intellectual desolation artificially produced by converting immature human beings into mere machines for the fabrication of surplus-value, a state of mind clearly distinguisha- ble from that natural ignorance which keeps the mind fallow with- out destroying its capacity for development, its natural fertility, this desolation finally compelled even the English Parliament to make elementary education a compulsory condition to the "pro- 1 1. Total cost of the above auxiliary materials, £10 week- ly. To get that far, another twenty years of experimentum in corpore vili had been required. per head!. The earth itself is an instrument of labour, but when used as such in agriculture implies a whole series of other instruments and a comparatively high development of la- bour. that commodities are the sole agents of production ... But if we deduct the doubling spindles that figure in the numbers for 1856, but not in those for 1862, it will be found that after 1856 the number of 6pindles remained nearly stationary. Then, not only does the immigration of labourers into the branch of industry in question cease; it gives place to their emigration. x Is Fourier wrong when he calls factories "tempered bagnos"? a mere dead letter ... Such are the sanitary dangers to which poverty is almost certainly exposed, when it is poverty enough to imply scantiness of food. In the beginning of June, 1836, information reached the magistrates of Dewsbury (Yorkshire) that the owners of 8 large mills in the neighbourhood of Batley had violated the Factory Acts. The miser's plan would be far simpler and surer; he sticks to his £100 instead of exposing it to the dangers of circulation. Hence it is that a dozen persons working together will, in their collective working-day of 144 hours, produce far more than twelve isolated men each working 12 hours, or than one man who works twelve days in succession. Second, the proportion between wages and surplus-value remains unaltered, since the mass of surplus-labour supplied by each particular labourer corresponds with the wage received by him. 376. Here we cannot reverse the equation, as we can the equation 20 yds. The collier is bound to take as part of his hiring a house surround- ed with pestiferous influences; he cannot help himself, and it appears doubtful whether anyone else can help him except his proprietor (he is, to all intents and purposes, a serf), and his proprietor first consults his balance-sheet, and the result is tolerably certain. The social action therefore of all other commodities, sets apart the particular commodity in which they all represent their values. . Hilary Sessions, County Antrim, 1860." 3 It is very characteristic of the regime of Louis Philippe, the bourgeois king, that the one Factory Act passed during his reign, that of March 22nd, 1841, was never put in force. L'un en fait une pendant que I autre en fait une autre, et tous contribuent a l'effet qu'un seul homme n aurait pu 328 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION In many industries, there are critical periods, determined by the nature of the process, during which certain definite results must be obtained. These means, therefore, were to them, not capital, but commodities. 1 These historical causes convert the separation of the money- name from the weight-name into an established habit with the community. HO CAPITALIST PRODUCTION G — M (linen — money), which is the first phase of G — M — C (linen — money — Bible), is also M — C (money — linen), the last phase of another movement C — M — C (wheat — money — linen). 2 "The effect of improve- ments in machinery, not merely in superseding the necessity for the employment of the same quantity of adult labour as before, in order to produce a given result, but in substituting one descrip- tion of human labour for another, the less skilled for the more skilled, juvenile for adult, female for male, causes a fresh disturb- ance in the rate of wages." 3 "The effect of substituting the self- acting mule for the common mule, is to discharge the greater part of the men spinners, and to retain adolescents and children." 4 The extraordinary power of expansion of the factory system owing to accumulated practical experience, to the mechanical means at hand, and to constant technical progress, was proved to us by the giant strides of that system under the pressure of a short- ened working-day. Darwin has interested us in the history of Nature's Technol- ogy, »•«•! in the formation of the organs of plants and animals, which or- gans serve as instruments of production for sustaining life. If in the fractions daily value of labour-power ., , . As a result of this movement, day-labour alone was successfully established in Wexford, Kilkenny, Clonmel, Waterford, &c. The basis of the production of commodities can admit of production on a large scale in the capitalistic form alone. May, "that notwithstanding the tem- porary disorganisation which inevitably follows the introduction of such a measure (as the Factory Acts Extension Act), and is, indeed, directly indic- ative of the evils which it was intended to remedy, &c." (Rep, of Insp. To the extent that commodity pro- duction, in accordance with its own inherent laws, develops fur- ther, into capitalist production, the property laws of com- modity production change into the laws of capitalist appropri- ation. But for the very reason that personal dependence forms the ground-work of society, there is no necessity for labour and its products to assume a fantastic form different from their reality. They inform me, on opening the bales of cotton there is an intolerable smell, which causes sickness.... This problem Henry Maudsley solved in the first decade of this century by the invention of the slide rest, a tool that was soon made automatic, and in a modified form was applied to other constructive machines besides the lathe, for which it was originally intended. The technical basis of that industry is therefore revolutionary, while all earlier modes of produc- tion were essentially conservative. It corrupts even the activity of his body and renders him inca- pable of exerting his strength with vigour and perseverance in any other employments than that to which he has been bred. 3. . school attendance... And these children had to do this ceaseless labour of 30 hours in the "shoddy- hole," as the hole is called, in which the woollen rags are pulled in pieces, and where a dense atmosphere of dust, shreds, &c, forces even the adult workman to cover his mouth continually with handkerchiefs for the protec- tion of his lungs! The accused gentlemen affirm in lieu of taking an oath — as quakers they were too scrupulously religious to take an oath— that they had, in their great compassion for the unhappy children, allowed them four hours for sleep, but the obstinate children absolutely would not go to bed. Ferrier, sous-inspecteur des douanes, "Du gouvernement considere dans ses rapports avec le commerce," Paris, 1805; and Charles Ganilh, "Des Systemes d'Economie Politique," 2nd ed., Paris, 1821. The religious world is but the reflex of the real world. 1 "Whether the united skill, industry, and emulation of many together on the same work be not the way to advance it? 1 pp 31, 32. This exploitation is more shameless in the so-called do- mestic industry than in manufactures, and that because the power of resistance in the labourers decreases with their dissemina- tion; because a whole series of plundering parasites insinuate them- selves between the employer and the workman; because a domestic industry has always to compete either with the factory system, or with manufacturing in the same branch of production; because poverty robs the workman of the conditions most essential to his labour, of space, light and ventilation; because employment be- comes more and more irregular; and, finally, because in these the last resorts of the masses made "redundant" by Modern Industry and Agriculture, competition for work attains its maximum. 2.) 2 Niebuhr in his "Roman History" says very naively: "It is evident that works like the Etruscan, which in their ruins astound us, pre-suppose in little (!) states lords and vassals." Sismondi says far more to the purpose that "Brussels lace" pre-supposes wage-lords and wage-slaves. A law peculiar to the circulation of paper money can spring up only from the proportion in which that paper money represents gold. He supposes, however, an approximately equal progress in the Continental countries mentioned, so that the numbers given would still have their value for purposes of comparison. If, on the other hand, the subject of labour has, so to say, been filtered through previous labour, we call it raw material; such is ore already extracted and ready for washing. This sum of £90 or s expresses the absolute 1 What Lucretius says is self-evident; "nil posse creari de nihilo," out of nothing, nothing can be created. By tools, I mean engineer's machinery, lathes, planing machines, drills, and so on." ("Royal Com. 1 "The circulating capital of a country," he says, "is its wage-fund. The only force that brings them together and puts them in relation with each other, is the selfishness, the gain and the private interests of each. But in whatever way the sum total of these outlays may be spread over the year, they must be covered by the average income, taking one day with another. Formerly, the peasant family produced the means of subsistence and the raw materials, which they themselves, for the most part, consumed. d. 2 But money itself is a commodity, an external object, capable of becoming the private property of any individual. Thiers, e.g., had the assurance to repeat it with all the solemnity of a states- man, to the French people, once so spirituel. 61, seq.). "The main difficulty [in the automatic factory]... On a tray in front of the fire lay a quantity of oakum, which the wife and children were picking in return for their allowance from the parish. Hence, leaving waste on one side, 366 lbs. Comb-making: 1851, 2,038: 1861, 1,478. Mary Anne Walkley had worked without intermission for 26y hours, with 60 other girls, 30 in one room, that only afforded -j of the cubic feet of air required for them. La societe veut-elle 'eliminer tous les inconvenients,' qui la travaillent, eh bien! qu'elle elimine les termes malsonnant, qu'elle change de langage, et pour cela elle n'a qu'a s'adresser a l'Academie pour lui demander une nouvelle edition de son dictionnaire." (Karl Marx, "Misere de la Philosophic," pp. . 4 See "Reports of Insp. 2 It is a result of the di- vision of labour in manufactures, that the labourer is brought face to face with the intellectual potencies of the material process of production, as the property of another, and as a ruling power. So far as regards value, that relation is limited to this, that the commodity contains a quantity of his own labour, that quantity being measured by a definite social standard. These meth- ods depend in part on brute force, e.g., the colonial system. We have in fact assumed that prices=values. It is only by being exchanged that the products of labour acquire, as values, one uniform social status, distinct from their varied forms of existence as objects of utility. 180 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION bones for the determination of extinct species of animals. When the machinery, as a whole, forms a system of manifold machines, working simultaneously and in concert, the co-opera- tion based upon it, requires the distribution of various groups of workmen among the different kinds of machines. The chief would be the in- crease of cost from employing men instead of boys. But in those finishing sties there are but 67 to 100 cubic feet to each person. of yarn indicate the absorption of 6 hours' labour. a-head per week." (Report of the Inspector of Factories for 30th April, 1860, p 27.) Mr Redgrave forgets to tell us how the labourer himself can do all this for his children out of their 4s. The workmen had no claim whatever to share in the profits made by the investment of their employer's capital in mechani- cal improvements. The majority of the "over-timers" de- clared: "They would much prefer working ten hours for less wages, but that they had no choice; that so many were out of employment (so many spinners getting very low wages by having to work as piecers, being unable to do better), that if they refused to work the longer time, others would immedi- ately get their places, so that it was a question with them of agreeing to work the longer time, or of being thrown out of em- ployment altogether." 2 The preliminary campaign of capital thus came to grief, and the Ten Hours' Act came into force May 1st, 1848. Let him produce 240,000 lbs. That happens only on its trans- formation into an industry carried on by machinery. 4.) * 1. In agriculture the land under cultivation cannot be increased without the advance of more seed and manure. The combination of these two phases constitutes the single movement whereby money is ex- changed for a commodity, and the same commodity is again exchanged for money; whereby a commodity is bought in order to be sold, or, neglecting the distinction in form between buying and selling, whereby a commodity is bought with money, and then money is bought with a commodity. I. Bathed in the fire of labour, appropriated as part and par- cel of labour's organism, and, as it were, made alive for the per- formance of their functions in the process, they are in truth con- sumed, but consumed with a purpose, as elementary constituents of new use-values, of new products, ever ready as means of sub- sistence for individual consumption, or as means of production for some new labour-process. In time-wages, with few exceptions, the same wage holds for the same kind of work, whilst in piece-wages, though the price of the working-time is measured by a certain quantity of product, 1 "It is when work passes through several hands, each of which is to take its share of profits, while only the last does the work, that the pay which reaches the workwoman is miserably disproportioned." ("Child. And from the mo- ment that this exclusion becomes finally restricted to one particu- lar commodity, from that moment only, the general form of rel- ative value of the world of commodities obtains real consistence and general social validity. The original capital of £10,000 brings in a surplus-value of £2,000, which is capitalised. Smuggling and the slave-trade have amply proved all that is here stated." (T. The antagonism between the manufacturing division of labour and the methods of Modern Industry makes itself forci- bly felt. Thiers here confounds the spinning machine with the power-loom, "a fact, however, that touches us but little." MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 443 cloth have been produced on power-looms by fewer weavers than could weave 100,000 yards by hand. MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 477 en. This circumstance depends, neither on the will of the wheat producer, nor on that of the owners of other commodities. 1. This circumstance influences only the amount of the money that comes back. As regards Wales, that which is said in the text holds only for the south-west. Any two of the factors may vary and the third remain constant, or all three may vary at once. c.) ■1. From 1770 to 1815 this trade was depressed or stagnant for 5 years only. And now, gentlemen, "farewell, and may we meet again in yonder better world, but not before." Senior invented the battle cry of the "last hour" in 1836. At the end of 1871, Mr. A. Jacob gives the following calculation for the year 1815. We must not let ourselves be misled by the circumstance that the cotton has taken a new shape while the substance of the spindle has to a certain extent been used up. They want transforming into capital. 6, n. In moving the colossal statues and vast masses of which the transport creates wonder, human labour almost alone, was prodigally used.... In the year 1860, when a special census of all the factories in the United Kingdom was taken by order of Parliament, the factories in those parts of Lancashire, Cheshire, and Yorkshire, included in the district of Mr. Baker, the factory inspector, numbered 652; 570 of these con- tained 85,622 power-looms, 6,819,146 spindles (exclusive of dou- bling spindles), employed 27,439 horse-power (steam), and 1,390 (water), and 94,119 persons. Assume that b' — b in the line a b' b c is equal to half of b c a b' — b c or to one hour's labour-time. (x'/.ivat ttsvts dvii — ojov at ttsvts xX(vat) He further sees that the value-relation which gives rise to this expression makes it necessary that the house should quali- tatively be made the equal of the bed, and that, without such an equalisation, these two clearly different things could not be compared with each other as commensurable quantities. It is the process itself that incessantly hurls back the labourer on to the market as a vendor of his labour-power, and that incessantly converts his own product into a means by which another man can purchase him. to 8.30 p. 1844, p. And why not? Although, therefore, the prodigality of the capitalist never pos- sesses the bona-fide character of the open-handed feudal lord's prodigality, but, on the contrary, has always lurking behind it the most sordid avarice and the most anxious calculation, yet his expenditure grows with his accumulation, without the one necessarily restricting the other. 413.) I quote Macaulay, because as systematic falsifier of history he minimises as much as possible facts of this kind. [Added in the 4th German edition. If, e.g., the working-day is 10 hours, and the daily val- ue of labour-power 3 shillings, the price of one working-hour is 3 3 -3-d. . Moreover, all progress in capitalistic agriculture is a prog- ress in the art, not only of robbing the labourer, but of robbing the soil; all progress in increasing the fertility of the soil for a given time, is a progress towards ruining the lasting sources of that fertility. . For example, suppose a shoemaker, with given tools, makes in one working-day of twelve hours, one pair of boots. The law, that the quantity of the circulating medium is determined by the sum of the prices of the commodities circu- lating, and the average velocity of currency 1 may also be stated as follows: given the sum of the values of commodities, and the average rapidity of their metamorphoses, the quantity of pre- cious metal current as money depends on the value of that precious metal. He knows no change, either in the length of the working-day, or in the intensity of labour; consequently with him there can be 1 "When an alteration takes place in the productiveness of industry, and that either more or less is produced by a given quantity of labour and capital, the proportion of wages may obviously vary, whilst the quantity, which that proportion represents, remains the same, or the quantity may vary, whilst the proportion remains the same." ("Outlines of Political Economy, &c.," p. The circuit G— M— G starts with one commodity, and fin- ishes with another, which falls out of circulation and into consump- tion. The social relations of the individual producers, with regard both to their labour and to its products, are in this case perfectly simple and intelligible, and that with regard not only to production but also to distribution. 520 we obtain the following laws: (1.) The working-day creates a greater or less amount of value in proportion to its length — thus, a variable and not a constant quantity of value. 9— d., shoemakers 2s. When this periodicity is once consolidated, even Political Economy then sees that the production of a rela- tive surplus-population — i.e., surplus with regard to the aver- age needs of the self-expansion of capital— is a necessary con- dition of modern industry. Towards the end of the week the men begin on Thursday night at 10 o'clock, and continue on with only slight intermission until late on Saturday evening." 1 Even the bourgeois intellect understands the position of the "underselling" masters. 1 "Combien de fois n'avons-nous pas vu, dans certains ateliers, embau- cher beaucoup plus d'ouvriers que ne le demandait le travail a mettre en main? 319.) 1 "The more variety ot artists to every manufacture .. So far as it is the art of gaining a livelihood, it is limited to procuring those articles that are necessary to existence, and useful either to a household or the state. I don't know where he lives." "Christ was a wicked man." "This girl spelt God as dog, and did not know the name of the queen." ("Ch. Employment Comm. It cannot be prolonged beyond a certain point. 232 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION business employs little more than 6% of boys under 18, and less than 1% under 13. The re- sult of the labour of the one is the starting-point for the labour of the other. of Pol. What the latter sells is his labour-power. The control exercised by the capitalist is not only a spe- cial function, due to the nature of the social labour-process, and peculiar to that process, but it is, at the same time, a function of the exploitation of a social labour-process, and is consequently rooted in the unavoidable antagonism between the exploiter and the living and labouring raw material he exploits. 5 Reports, &c, for the half year ending 30th April, 1861. They are both com- modities, and commodities of equal value. He is unable to add new labour, to create new value, without at the same time preserving old values, and this, because the labour he adds must be of a specific useful kind; and he cannot do work of a useful kind, without employing products as the means of production of a new product, and thereby transferring their value to the new product. In England the culti- vation of green crops increases with the breeding of cattle; in Ireland, it decreases. Thereupon the commodity, under its aspect of a useful object, falls out of circulation into consump- tion. We leave on one side here the purely economic causes of the agricultural revolution. Insp. It is the same as if he had bought the -product ready made in the market. The capitalist thinks, that he is consuming the produce of the unpaid labour of others, i.e., the surplus-value, and is keeping intact his original capital; but 1 "The wages of labour are advanced by capitalists in the case of less than one fourth of the labourers of the earth." (Rich. For the sake, therefore, of public morals, of bringing up an orderly population, and of giving the great body of the people a reasonable enjoyment of life, it is much to be desired that in all trades some portion of every working-day should be reserved for rest and leisure." (Leonard Horner in "Reports of Insp. to 36 lbs. 55 and 56. But however great the progress of English industry had been during the 8 years from 1848 to 1856 under the influence of a working-day of 10 hours, it was far surpassed during the next period of 6 years from 1856 to 1862. The production of wearing apparel is carried on partly in manufactories in whose workrooms there is but a reproduction of that division of labour, the membra disjecta of which were found ready to hand; partly by small master-handicraftsmen; MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 471 these, however, do not, as formerly, work for individual con- sumers, but for manufactories and warehouses, and to such an extent that often whole towns and stretches of country carry on certain branches, such as shoemaking, as a speciality; finally, on a very great scale by the so-called domestic workers, who form an external department of the manufac- tories, warehouses, and even of the workshops of the smaller masters. With what fanaticism, accord- ing to the evidence of manufacturers given in courts of law, their hands set themselves against every interruption in factory labour, the following curi- ous circumstance shows. Rep.," p. 3 The thoroughly conscientious investi- gations of the Children's Employment Commission prove that the effect of the regulation of the hours of work, in some indus- tries, was to spread the mass of labour previously employed more evenly over the whole year; 4 that this regulation was the first rational bridle on the murderous, meaningless caprices of fashion, 5 caprices that consort so badly with the system of modern industry; that the development of ocean navigation and of the means of communication generally, has swept away the technical basis on which season-work was really supported, 6 and that all other so-called unconquerable difficulties vanish before larger build- ings, additional machinery, increase in the number of work- 1 "Ch. Empl. 35. 2 1. xx. They are now capable of being compared with each other and measured, and the want becomes technically felt of comparing them with some fixed quantity of gold as a unit measure. The sons ol farmers make up a great part ol them. Rept," p. But the latter changes with every variation in the productiveness of labour. But in work by the day there is generally an uniform rate ... The reality of the value of commodities differs in this respect from Dame Quickly, that we don't know "where to have it." The value of commodities is the very opposite of the coarse mate- riality of their substance, not an atom of matter enters into its composition. 7. Though the latter with a por- tion of that tribute purchases the additional labour-power even at its full price, so that equivalent is exchanged for equivalent, yet the transaction is for all that only the old dodge of every con- queror who buys commodities from the conquered with the money he has robbed them of. And because it is a necessary condition, and for no other reason, the value of that cotton is transferred to the product. The concluding metamorphosis of a commodity thus con- stitutes an aggregation of first metamorphoses of various other commodities. The value and quantity of the in- struments of labour used in common do not, it is true, increase at the same rate as the number of workmen, but they do increase very considerably. Out of 686 female patients who were lace- makers, most of them between the ages of 17 and 24, the number of consumptive ones were: 1852.— 1 in 45. . Th. Thornton: "Over-population and its Remedy,'* Lond., 1846. Labour is, in the first place, a process in which both man and Nature participate, and in which man of his own accord starts, regulates, and controls the material re-actions between himself and Nature. c, p. It is true that the value of money varies, at one time in consequence of a variation in its own value, at another, in consequence of a change in the values of commodities. Labour by the piece is generally cheaper in England." (James Anderson, "Observations on the Means of Exciting a Spirit of National Industry, &c, Edin. His erroneous dogma: "An unfa- vourable balance of trade never arises but from a redundant currency.... A question that could only have been proposed, because Peel was as much in the dark as to the nature of money as the "little shilling men" of Birmingham. "Modern policy," says Dr. Richard Price also, "is, indeed, more favourable to the higher classes of people; and the consequences 1 James E. The money-form attaches itself either to the most important articles of exchange from outside, and these in fact are primitive and natural forms in which the exchange- value of home products finds expression; or else it attaches itself to the object of utility that forms, like cattle, the chief portion of indigenous alienable wealth. His development into a full-grown capitalist must take place, both within the sphere of circulation and without it. This increment or excess over the original value I call "surplus- value." The value originally advanced, therefore, not only re- mains intact while in circulation, but adds to itself a surplus- value or expands itself. If the productiveness of labour has, during the using up of these instruments of labour, increased (and it develops continually with the uninterrupted advance of science and technology), more efficient and (considering their increased efficiency), cheaper machines, tools, apparatus, &c, replace the old. 41. No child or young person [or female] shall be employed or allowed to remain in any room in which any manufacturing process is then [i.e., at meal- times] carried on," &c. This invention confirms the great doctrine already propounded, that when capital enlists science into her service, the refractory hand of labour will always be taught docility." ' Although Ure's work appeared 30 years ago, at a time when the factory system was comparatively but little developed, it still perfectly expresses the spirit of the factory, not only by its undisguised cynicism, but also by the naivete with which it blurts out the stupid contradictions of the capitalist brain. On the contrary, with a given amount of population, this limit is formed by the possi- ble lengthening of the working-day. Pretext: "Labour in silk mills was lighter than in mills for other fabrics, and less likely in other respects also to be prejudicial to health." 5 Official medical inquiries proved afterwards that, on the contrary, "the average death-rate is exceedingly high in the silk districts, and amongst the female part of the population is higher even than it is in the cotton districts of Lancashire." 6 Despite the protests 1 Reports, &c, for Sept.. For every hour of absence Id. is to be subtracted from the wage. per week, and the weavers from 2s. Now he sells wife and child. c, p. 102 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION less they are its prices, for they are, in the first place, the form under which its value appears, i.e., money; and in the second place, the exponents of its exchange-ratio with money. In the former, the supernumeraries of agriculture are transformed into factory operatives; in the latter, those forced into the towns, whilst at the same time they press on the wages 1 I. He is a zero in farm- ing calculations. Trace out the effects upward to the small farmer, the better householder, and.... the de- manding higher wages, because labour is abbreviated, is in other words the endeavour to establish a duty on mechanical improvements." ("On Combination of Trades," new ed., London, 1834, p. 96.) 1 Population of Ireland, 1801, 5,319,867 persons; 1811, 6,084,996; 1821, 6,869,544; 1831, 7,828,347; 1841, 8,222,664. 1 Another "friendly" dodge was to make the adult males work 12 to 15 hours, and then to blazon abroad this fact as the best proof of what the proletariat desired in its heart of hearts. The buyer gives a certain sum of money, the seller an article of a nature different from money. Bastiat, who imagines that the ancient Greeks and Romans lived by plunder alone. The question arises, how much will it attract? Vol. It is clearly the result of a past historical development, the product of many economic revolutions, of the extinction of a whole series of older forms of social production. * Therefore, it is with the advent of machinery, that the workman for the first time brutally revolts against the instruments of labour. and even the enclosure of waste lands (as now carried on) bears hard on the poor, by depriving them of a part of their subsistence, and only goes towards increasing farms already too large." 2 "When," says Dr. Price, "this land gets into the hands of a few great farmers, the consequence must be that the little farmers" (earlier designated by him "a multitude of little proprietors and tenants, who maintain themselves and families by the produce of the ground they occupy by sheep kept on a common, by poul- try, hogs, &c, and who therefore have little occasion to purchase any of the means of subsistence") "will be converted into a body of men who earn their subsistence by working for others, and who will be under a necessity of going to market for all they want. 4 "The present law (of 1850) was a compromise whereby the employed surrendered the benefit of the Ten Hours' Act for the advantage of one uni- form period for the commencement and termination of the labour of those whose labour is restricted." (Reports, &.C., for 30th April, 1852, p. For the six weeks ending May 2nd this year~(1862), the average was higher— 8 days or 84 hours a week." Still this same Mr. Smith, who is so extremely devoted to the pluralis majestatis, adds with a smile, "Machine- work is not great." So the employers in the block-printing say: "Hand labour is more healthy than machine-work." On the whole, manufacturers declare with indignation against the 1 This is not to be taken in the same sense as our surplus-labour time. A commodity represents, say 6 working-hours. The two inverse changes undergone by the same commodity are reflected in the displacement, twice repeated, but in opposite directions, of the same pieces of coin. 31-37, passim.) It is well known that in Eastern Europe as well as in Asia, English companies have undertaken the construction of railways, and have, in making them, employed side by side with the native labourers, a certain number of English working-men. for ten minutes. of Fact., for 31st Oct., 1862," p. . taking direct measures to insure it." (1. c, p. 61-62. He tries persuasion. 149. When one commodity replaces another, the money- commodity always sticks to the hands of some third person. of yarn, in the example given in Sec. 14.) 146 PART II THE TRANSFORMATION OF MONEY INTO CAPITAL CHAPTER IV THE GENERAL FORMULA FOR CAPITAL The circulation of commodities is the starting-point of capital. There thus remains only a single balance to pay. Political Economy takes the historical function of the capitalist in bitter earnest. "For this the legislature is alone to blame, by having passed a delusive law, which, while it would seem to provide that the children employed in factories shall be educated, contains no enactment by which that professed end can be secured. WORKING-DAY CONSTANT. As the heavenly bodies, once thrown into a certain definite motion, always repeat this, so is it with social production as soon as it is once thrown into this move- ment of alternate expansion and contraction. . In working-day I, it is -^-, in working-day 11, -g-, in working-day III, -g- of A B. d. This general result is treated, here, as if it were the immediate result directly aimed at in each individual case. In the one case the relative value of the linen is expressed in the coat, in the other case the relative value of the coat is expressed in the linen. This observation is made for the purpose of explaining various citations in the subsequent pages. 5 by 5 ft. But it by no means follows from this that the most fruitful soil is the most fitted for the growth of the capitalist mode of produc- tion. -+-£90 var. And why may not the superior ingenuity and dexterity of our artists and manufacturers, be owing to that freedom and liberty to direct themselves in their own way, and I hope we shall never have them deprived of such privileges and that good living from whence their ingenuity no less than their courage may pro- ceed." 1 Thereupon the author of the "Essay on Trade and Commerce" replies: "If the making of every seventh day an holiday is supposed to be of divine institution, as it implies the appropriating the other six days to labour" (he means cap- ital as we shall soon see) "surely it will not be thought cruel to enforce it ... But an increase in the productiveness of labour in those branches of industry which supply neither the necessaries of life, nor the means of production for such neces- saries, leaves the value of labour-power undisturbed. By the destruction of petty and domestic industries it destroys the last resort of the "redundant population," and with it the sole remaining safety-valve of the whole social mechanism. The smelting furnaces, rolling-mills, &c, the build- ings, machinery, iron, coal, &c, have something more to do than transform themselves into steel. Increase of variable capital, in this case, becomes an index of more labour, but not of more labourers employed. 554.) 2 "Pour avoir cet argent, il faut avoir vendu," 1. Among the attend- ants are reckoned more or less all "Feeders" who supply the ma- chines with the material to be worked. One manufacturer, too, tells the plain truth. Suppose the same workman were to change his oc- cupation to that of a joiner, he would still by a day's labour add value to the material he works upon. The cots with one bedroom shel- tered 3 adults and 3 children, a married couple with 6 children, &c. . The value created varies with the extent to which the intensity of labour deviates from its CHANGES OF MAGNITUDE 525 normal intensity in the society. We have seen how this absolute contradiction between the technical necessities of Modern Indus- try, and the social character inherent in its capitalistic form, dis- pels all fixity and security in the situation of the labourer; how it constantly threatens, by taking away the instruments of la- bour, to snatch from his hands his means of subsistence, * and, by suppressing his detail-function, to make him superfluous. If, therefore, a certain degree of accumulation of capital appears as a condition of the specifically capitalist mode of production, the latter causes conversely an accelerated accumulation of capi- tal. The sum of the incomes of the United Kingdom that come under the income tax wasin 1856, £307, 068, 898; in 1859, £328,127,416; in 1862, £351,745,241; in 1863, £359,142,897; in 1864, £362,462,279; in 1865, £385,530,020. 4 See the Report on the rag trade, and numerous details in "Public Health, VIII. For the present I will only say this: The labourers that are thrown out of work in any branch of industry, can no doubt seek for employment in some other branch. Emp. But in time the old capital also reaches the moment of renewal from top to toe, when it sheds its skin and is reborn like the others in a perfected tech- nical form, in which a smaller quantity of labour will suffice to set in motion a larger quantity of machinery and raw materials. For spinning the yarn, raw material is required; suppose in this case 10 lbs. Again, since the value of the yarn produced in 2 hours, is equal to the sum of the values of his wages and of your net profit, the measure of the 1 3 value of this yarn must be 11-^- working-hours, of which 5-t- hours measure the value of the yarn produced in the last hour but one, 3 and 5-t- , the value of the yarn produced in the last hour. We may melt down the heaviest and turn it into the splendour of plate, vessels or utensils of gold or silver; or send it out as a commodity, where the same is wanted or desired; or let it out at interest, where interest is high." (W. 4) Workshops in which no children or young workers are employed, but only persons of both sexes above the age of 18; this category enjoy still easier conditions. 7me Dis. The value of commodities is in inverse ratio to the produc- tiveness of labour. In a community, the produce of which in general takes the form of commodities, i.e., in a community of commodity producers, this qualitative difference between the useful forms of labour that are carried on independently by individual producers, each on their own account, develops into a complex system, a social division of labour. "Although the same number of hands are employed in proportion to the horse- power as at former periods, there are fewer hands employed in proportion to the machinery." 2 "In the year 1850, the factories of the United Kingdom employed 134,217 nominal horse-power to give motion to 25,638,716 spindles and 301,445 looms. Even as late as the beginning of the 18th century, sawmills driven by Water overcame the opposition of the people, supported as it was by Parliament, only with great difficulty. 2 In bourgeois societies the economic fictio juris prevails, that every one, as a buyer, possesses an encyclopaedic knowledge of commodities. c. But they are also use- values differing in their qualities, as, for example, corn and clothes. forbade a higher day's wage than 2s. p. t. At the same time the progress of accumulation increases the material amenable to centralisation, i.e., the individual capitals, whilst the expan- sion of capitalist production creates, on the one hand, the social want, and, on the other, the technical means necessary for those immense industrial undertakings which require a previous central- isation of capital for their accomplishment. This is one of the few counties, in which circumstances do not secure to the farmer undisputed proprietary rights over the agricultural 578 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION himself, by his change of masters, and by the oscillations in the market-price of labour-power. 494 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION "Employed shall mean occupied in any handicraft, whether for wages or not, under a master or under a parent as herein de- fined." "Parent shall mean parent, guardian, or person, having the custody of, or control over, any . Paris, 1846.) MACHINERY AND MODFRN INDUSTRY 423 system to the uttermost, it does away with the many-sided play of the muscles, and confiscates every atom of freedom, both in bodily and intellectual activity. The practical agents of capitalistic production and their pettifogging ideologists are as unable to think of the means of production as separate from the antag- onistic social mask they wear to-day, as a slave-owner to think of the worker himself as distinct from his character as a slave. * But consider, for example, an inhabitant of the eastern islands of the- Asiatic Archipelago, where sago grows wild in the forests. This condition is fulfilled by money taking the form of hoards. * Econ- omy of the social means of production, matured and forced as in a hothouse by the factory system, is turned, in the hands of cap- ital, into systematic robbery of what is necessary for the life of the workman while he is at work, robbery of space, light, air, and of protection to his person against the dangerous and unwhole- and painful times deducted lOd. a piece from some of the young workers employed by him, for the surgeon's certificate (for which he himself had only paid 6d.), when only allowed hy the law to deduct 3d., and by custom nothing at all . 492 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION upon the young and the feeble, who are its more immediate objects, but upon the still larger body of adult workers, who would in all these employments, both directly and indirectly, come immediately under its influence. At first, therefore, these new parts are just as transient and alternating as those of seller and buyer, and are in turns played by the same actors. 599.) 2 Thus from 1844-47 he withdrew part of his capital from productive employment, in order to throw it away in railway speculations; and so also, during the American Civil War, he closed his factory, and turned his work- people into the streets, in order to gamble on the Liverpool cotton exchange. * In some branches of industry, the girls and women work through the night together with the males. And as we pre-supposed the limits set by capitalist production, that is to say, pre-supposed the process of social production in a form developed by purely spontaneous growth, we neglected any more rational combination, directly and systematically practi- cable with the means of production, and the mass of labour-power at present disposable. THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 661 had more than 50,000. iii., p. But how use-values, which are incommensurable with regard to each other, are to be exchanged, en masse, for the total sum of gold and silver in a country, is quite incomprehensible. A room where twenty weavers work at twenty looms must be larger than the room of a single weaver with two assistants. The one great industry of Ireland, linen-manufacture, requires relatively few adult men and only employs altogether, in spite of its expansion since the price of cotton rose in 1861-1866, a comparatively in- significant part of the population. In other print works the children's attendance at school is made to depend altogether upon the exigencies of the work in the establish- ment. The number of inhabited houses fell, from 1851-1861, by 52,990. Since this remain- der plays no part in the formation of value, we may at present leave it on one side. In one of its par- ishes, the Officer of Health reckoned 581 persons per acre, although half the width of the Thames was reckoned in. This growth, however, is conditioned by the ebb and flow of the industrial cycle. whenever ... But in the capitalist the greed for surplus-labour appears in the straining after an unlim- ited extension of the working-day, in the Boyard more simply in a direct hunting after days of corvee. The population of Ireland had, in 1841, reached 8,222,664; in 1851, it had dwindled to 6,623,985; in 1861, to 5,850,309; in 1866, to 5y millions, nearly to its level in 1801. 278,837,438 MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 419 posed of various mechanical and intellectual organs,, acting in uninterrupted concert for the production of a common object, all of them being subordinate to a self-regulated moving force." These two descriptions are far from being identical. The pro- duction of the workshops of England is being increased by the use of improved tools and these tools are again served by a low class of labour. The lot of the factory operatives will be best depicted by tak- ing a rapid survey of the course of the English cotton industry. For instance, one man is king only be- cause other men stand in the relation of subjects to him. to 2d. The one is inanimate, the other living. * In 1795 the deficit was less than -j the wage, in 1814, more than half. The secret of the flour- ishing state of industry in Spain and Sicily under the dominion of the Arabs lay in their irrigation works. A man lived here for a little while, with two grown-up daughters and one grown-up son; father and son slept on the bed, the girls in the passage. (1 .) Bedfordshire Wrestlingworth. . After this reduction to the same terms of the day-wages, time-wage must again be translated into piece-wage, as the latter only can be a measure both of the productivity and the intensity of labour. In the same time as the Chinaman spins one pound of cotton, the Eng- lishman spins several hundreds of pounds. This ratio, in its turn, varies considerably with the extent to which machinery has already seized on, or is then seizing on, those trades. But why, then, should "systematic colonisation" be called in to replace its opposite, spontaneous, unregulated colonisation? Let us put ourselves in the place of the labourer who re- ceives for 12 hours' labour, say the value produced by 6 hours' la- bour, say 3s. is determined not by equal quantities of labour." (E. In fact, not only the number of births and deaths, but the absolute size of the families stand in inverse proportion to the height of wages, and therefore to the amount of means of subsist- ence of which the different categories of labourers dispose. Just as in Man- ufacture, the direct co-operation of the detail labourers estab- lishes a numerical proportion between the special groups, so in an organised system of machinery, where one detail machine is con- stantly kept employed by another, a fixed relation is established between their numbers, their size, and their speed. Bd. p. If we suppose that, all other circumstances remaining the same, the composi- tion of capital also remains constant (i.e., that a definite mass of means of production constantly needs the same mass of labour- power to set it in motion), then the demand for labour and the subsistence-fund of the labourers clearly increase in the same proportion as the capital, and the more rapidly, the more rapidly the capital increases. 290. This movement among the Highland proprietors is with some a matter of ambi- tion . Only by lowering the price of labour-power below its value could the capitalist save himself harmless. Since A B is constant, the ratio of BCto A B can always be calculated. This is the case whenever its utility to man is not due to labour. Much more aptly, the anonymous predecessor of Adam Smith, quoted above in Note 1, p. His sur- o plus-labour is, therefore, increased by 2-r- hours, and the surplus- value he produces grows from one, into three shillings. Although the splitting up of handicrafts lowers the cost of form- ing the workman, and thereby lowers his value, yet for the more difficult detail work, a longer apprenticeship is necessary, and, even where it would be superfluous, is jealously insisted upon by the workmen. c, p. 147.) Since certain family functions, such as nursing and suckling children, cannot be entirely suppressed, the mothers confiscated by capital, must try substitutes of some sort. 2 But, finally, part of the sheep-walks are turned into deer preserves. These objects, gold and silver, just as they come out of the bowels of the earth, are forthwith the direct incarnation of all human labour. . . 396, 998 2 The servant class, 1,208,648 8 1 Of these only 177,596 are males above 13 years of age. CM 1 «o lO CO SS5 CO coo iO CO CM „-? Here we have, in the place of the isolated machine, a mechanical monster whose body fills whole factories, and whose demon power, 382 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION at first veiled under the slow and measured motions of his giant limbs, at length breaks out into the fast and furious whirl of his countless working organs. . On getting outside a young fellow came running after us, and asked us to step inside his house and see if anything could be done for him. Even in those few cases where full time was worked, and at the customary rate of piece-wage, the weekly wages of the operatives necessarily shrank, owing to good cotton being replaced by bad, Sea Island by Egyptian (in fine spinning mills), American and Egyptian by Surat, and pure cotton by mixings of waste and Surat. It is otherwise with the instruments of labour. 186.) In Elizabeth's time, "rogues were trussed up apace, and that there was not one year commonly wherein three or four hundred were not devoured and eaten up by the gallowes." (Strype's Annals of the Reforma- tion and Establishment of Religion, and other Various Occurrences in the Church of England during Queen Elizabeth's Happy Reign." Seconded., 1725, Vol. The greatest number (of things) have their value from supplying the wants of the mind." Nicholas Barbon: "A Discourse Con- cerning Coining the New Money Lighter. m. Wakefield to have dis- covered, not anything new about the Colonies, l but to have dis- covered in the Colonies the truth as to the conditions of capitalist production in the mother-country. You pay me for one day's labour-power, whilst you use that of 3 days. , . of Fact. Im- proved construction of the machinery isnecessary, partly because without it greater pressure cannot be put on the workman, and partly because the shortened hours of labour force the capitalist to exercise the strictest watch over the cost of production. The living machinery, on the contrary, gets better the longer it lasts, and in proportion as the skill, handed from one generation to another, accumulates. Purchasers now come up from Glasgow, Manchester, and Edinburgh once ev- ery fortnight or so to the wholesale city warehouses which we sup- ply, and give small orders requiring immediate execution, instead of buying from stock as they used to do. Aps- den: "That boy of mine . "Legal constraint (to labour) is attended with too much trouble, violence, and noise, .... It has now been shown how the various component parts of the value of the product, parts that differ functionally from each other, may be represented by corresponding proportional parts of the product itself. One of the most recent Blue books on mines is the "Report from the Select Committee on Mines, together with &c. 232. 8 "Profit, in the usual condition of the market, is not made by ex- changing. In truth, we shall also find that in relation to the arts and handicrafts, they have outstripped their rivals more than a master does a bungler; and the contrivances for maintaining the monarchy and the other institutions of DIVISION OF LABOUR AND MANUFACTURE 367 continued to have this importance to the Greeks of the Roman Empire. . And to whom do they sell? In the counties of Cambridge and Suffolk, for example, the area of cultivated land has extended very much within the last 20 years (up to 1868), while in the same period the rural population has diminished, not only relatively, but absolutely. Polit." 2eme edit. Hence, that formula of the economists, referred to in Chapter XVIII., which represents wages as a share in the product itself. Come what will, he has no share either in prosperity or adversity." 4 In the year 1863, an official inquiry took place into the con- ditions of nourishment and labour of the criminals condemned to transportation and penal servitude. The fearful increase in death from starvation during the last 10 years in Lon- don runs parallel with the extension of machine sewing. Just as the individual labourer can do more surplus-labour in proportion as his necessary labour-time is less, so with regard to the working population. If the ex- tremes of poverty have not lessened, they have increased, because the extremes of wealth have. of this work, in the section on landed property. But the actual wage-variation can be evidenced in a very simple way, without entering into details that are here unneces- sary. About the middle of the 16th century the proportion was changed of 2 acres of pasture to 2, later on, of 2 acres of pasture to one of arable, until at last the just proportion of 3 acres of pasture to one of arable land was attained." In the 19th century, the very memory of the connexion between the agricultural labourer and the communal property had, of course, vanished. Let its value-product be 6 shillings, that of one hour's labour therefore 6d. The result is not the return of the money, but its continued removal further and further away from its starting- 1 See my observations on James Mill in "Zur Kritik, &c," pp. 543.) 148 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION the same material elements— a commodity, and money, and the same economic dramatis personse, a buyer and a seller — con- front one another. The men are now obliged to seek work of the neighbouring farmers and are only hired by the day, and therefore under the most precarious form of wage. Or a larger period of oscillations in the market-price is taken, e.g., a year, and they are found to cancel one the other, leaving a mean average quantity, a relatively con- stant magnitude. As soon, therefore, as the labourers learn the secret, how it comes to pass that in the same measure as they work more, as they produce more wealth for others, and as the productive power of their labour increases, so in the same measure even their function as a means of the self- expansion of capital becomes more and more precarious for them; as soon as they discover that the degree of intensity of the compe- tition among themselves depends wholly on the pressure of the relative surplus-population; as soon as, by Trades' Unions, &c, they try to organise a regular co-operation between employed and unemployed in order to destroy or to weaken the ruinous effects of this natural law of capitalistic production on their class, so soon capital and its sycophant, Political Economy, cry out at the infringement of the "eternal" and so to say "sacred" law of supply and demand. — I am a beetler and work from 6 in the morning till 11 at night, from Monday to Friday. This last does not mean that simple concentration of the means of production and of the com- mand over labour, which is identical with accumulation. Let us now pass from the commodity considered as a use- value to the value of commodities. 317.) 554 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION which they actually allow to reach the labourer. So long as the laws of exchange are observed in every single act of exchange the mode of appropriation can be completely revolutionised with- out in any way affecting the property rights which correspond to commodity production. 1 The guilds of the middle ages 1 "The farmer cannot rely on his own labour, and if he does, I will maintain that he is a loser by it. un effort constant pour regis- ter a la tentation de le consommer." (Courcelle-Seneuil, 1. " That excessive insobriety is prevalent from childhood upwards among the whole of this class, is only natural. 3 The English factory workers were the champions, not only of the English, but of the modern working-class generally, as their theorists were the first to throw down the gauntlet to the theory of capital. . Since the process of produc- tion is also the process by which the capitalist consumes labour- power, the product of the labourer is incessantly converted, not only into commodities, but into capital, into value that sucks up the value-creating power, into means of subsistence that buy the person of the labourer, into means of production that command the producers. The barba- rous laws against Trades' Unions fell in 1825 before the threatening bearing of the proletariat. These antagonistic forms of commodities are the real forms in which the process of their exchange moves and takes place. II., p. Eight additional sub-inspectors were appoint- ed in 1871. We declaim against the Vir- ginian and Carolinian cotton-planters. Thus the series of paraffins: c n H 2n-f2 > that of the norma i alcohols: C n H 2n+2 0; of the normal fatty acids: C n H 2n O 2 and many others. The thief, the interpreter, and the seller, were the chief agents in this trade, native princes the chief sellers. The English economists of course explained the famine of the Gaels in 1847, by their over-population. All labour appears as paid labour. J. Brit., 1831.) 1 "Where reference is made to labour as a measure of value, it neces- sarily implies labour of one particular kind ... 285, 289, p. c. The surplus-value produced by prolongation of the working- day, I call absolute surplus-value. Moreover, however much the individual manufacturer might give the rein to his old lust for gain, the spokesmen and political leaders of the manufacturing class ordered a change of front and of speech towards the workpeople. — Certainly not." No. 3048. 2 "As one man cannot, and ten men must strain to lift a tou of weight, yet 100 men can do it only by the strength of a finger of each of them." (John Bellers: "Proposals for Raising a Golledge of Industry." London, 1696. The Jenny, on the other hand, even at its very birth, spun with 12-18 spindles, and the stocking-loom knits with many thousand needles at once." The number of tools that a machine can bring into play simultaneously, is from the very first emanci- pated from the organic limits that hedge in the tools of a handi- craftsman. The neglect in its centre, becomes mortifica- tion at its extremities, north and south, where the houses are rotting to pieces. It quite failed at that time of proof when put to the test, and again it will certainly fail should it have to be tried." ("Reports of Insp. have but to resolve that there shall be no labourers' dwellings on their estates, and their estates will thenceforth be virtually free from half their respon- sibility for the poor. And to this day it constantly serves as such a starting-point, whenever a handicraft, or a manufacture, is turned into an industry carried on by 'machinery. But although the factory as a whole be driven by its steam-engine, yet either some of the individual machines may require the aid of the workman for some of their movements (such aid was nec- essary for the running in of the mule carriage, before the inven- tion of the self-acting mule, and is still necessary in fine-spinning mills); or, to enable a machine to do its work, certain parts of it may require to be handled by the workman like a manual tool; this was the case in machine-makers' workshops, before the con- version of the slide rest into a self-actor. If, therefore, such expressions as "£90 variable capital," or "so much self-expanding value," appear contradictory, this is only be- cause they bring to the surface a contradiction immanent in capitalist production. 186. In consequence there arose local fam- ines, the defective means of communication not permitting the failure of rice in one district to be compensated by importation from another 2 Thus the fabrication of shuttles formed, as early as the 17th century, a special branch of industry in Holland. • Sir J. Since, however, manu- facture carries this social separation of branches of labour much further, and also, by its peculiar division, attacks the individual at the very roots of his life, it is the first to afford the materials for, and to give a start to, industrial pathology. Or, as old Barbon says, "one sort of wares are as good as another, if the values be equal. About 25 years ago the ratio expressing the relative value of gold and silver was 15-|-:1; now it is approximately 22:1, and silver is still constantly falling as against gold. On the other hand, the money-value of this surplus-produce increased yet more rapidly than its mass, in consequence of the rise in the English market-price of meat, wool, &c, during the last 20, and especially during the last 10, years. there may be an extreme on the other side. The provincials cheated the Romans, and thus got back from their conquerors, in the course of trade, a portion of the tribute. But they all employ the power of the State, the concentrated and organ- ised force of society, to hasten, hothouse fashion, the process of transformation of the feudal mode of production into the capital- ist mode, and to shorten the transition. . 6. c. 2 Factory legislation for the first time went beyond its original sphere in the "Printworks' Act of 1845." The displeasure with which capital received this new "extravagance" speaks through every line of the Act. (3) Farms over 5, not over 15 acres. Eden, it may be remarked in passing, is the only disciple of Adam Smith during the eighteenth century that produced any work of importance. Hoefer, Paris, 1863, p. Let us now examine the product of this prolonged process. of Fact, for 31st Oct., 1858/* pp.31. Addington: "Inquiry into the Reasons for or against Enclosing Open Fields." London, 1772, pp. In the 14 sleeping rooms, 34 adults and 33 children. He produces values that give fresh command over his labour, and that, by means of such command, create fresh values." (Karl Marx: "Lohnarbeit und Kapital," in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, No. 266, 7th April, 1849.) The articles pub- lished under the above title in the N. 476 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION the newly-constructed stoves for drying the ware in its green state, &c, are each events of great importance in the pottery art, and mark an advance which the preceding century could not rival. "Fifteen girls in stoves. 45.) 2 *[Note in the 4th German edition. Moreover, we see at a glance that, in our capitalist society, a given portion of human labour is, in accordance with the varying demand, at one time supplied in the form of tailoring, at another in the form of weaving. a day for the good of the family? The consumption of labour-power is completed, as in the case of every other commodity, outside the limits of the market or of well aware of this adulteration, nevertheless accept the alum, stone-dust, &c, as part of their purchase: that it is for them "a matter of necessity to take from their baker or from the chandler's shop, such bread as they choose to supply." As they are not paid their wages before the end ot the week, they in their turn are unable "to pay for the bread consumed by their tami- lies during the week, before the end of the week," and Tremenheere adds on the evidence of witnesses, "it is notorious that bread composed of those mix- tures is made expressly for sale in this manner." In many English and still more Scotch agricultural districts, wages are paid fortnightly and even monthly; with such long intervals between the payments, the agri- cultural labourer is obliged to buy on credit... The former appear directly and spontane- ously as current modes of thought; the latter must first be discov- ered by science. in consequence of the additional supply of labour having diminished its price." (Senior, I. Without a certain de- gree of productiveness in his labour, he has no such superfluous time at his disposal; without such superfluous time, no surplus- labour, and therefore no capitalists, no slave-owners, no feudal lords, in one word, no class of large proprietors. "Now the following analysis (!) will show that in a mill so worked, the whole net profit is derived from the last hour. c, pp. Meanwhile, the wealthier manufacturers, who combined spinning with weaving, used the diminution of production resulting from this agreement, to extend their own business and thus to make great profits at the expense of the small employers. In it all freedom comes to an end both at law and in fact. . The objection would be the increase in the cost of pro- duction Skilled hands and the heads in every depart- ment are difficult to get, but of lads we could get any number. . This separation begins in simple co-operation, where the capitalist represents to the single workman, the oneness and the will of the as- sociated labour. * Constant changes in the construction of the machines, and their ever-increasing cheapness, depreciate day by day the older makes, and allow of their being sold in great numbers, at absurd prices, to large capitalists, who alone can thus employ them at a profit. I. c, p. A few acres to the cottage would make the labourers too independent." 1 The process of forcible expropriation of the people received in the 16th century a new and frightful impulse from the Refor- mation, and from the consequent colossal spoliation of the church property. c, p. 3 This is the secret both of the pros- perity of the colonies and of their inveterate vice — opposition to the establishment of capital. Non olet, from whatever source it may come. In 1854 the Society of Arts appointed a Commission of Inquiry into industrial pathology. Those who are worked over-time feel the injustice equally with those who are condemned to forced idleness. The owners of commodities came therefore into contact as the respective representatives of what were already equivalents. yds. Commodity-owner No. 1, may therefore be ready to sell, before No. 2 is ready to buy. The value of the coat is equated to linen, that of the tea to iron. [Added in the 3rd German edition. Once given the general basis of the capitalistic system, then, in the course of accumulation, a point is reached at which the development of the productivity of social labour becomes the most powerful lever of accumulation. Thus, in the relative expres- sion of value of the linen, the coat assumes the form of equiva- lent, or of being directly exchangeable, only in relation to a single commodity, the linen. The law by which a constantly increasing quantity of means of production, thanks to the advance in the productiveness of social labour, may be set in movement by a progressively di- minishing expenditure of human power, this law, in a capitalist society— where the labourer does not employ the means of pro- THE GENERAL LAW OP CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 645 duction, but the means of production employ the labourer — undergoes a complete inversion and is expressed thus: the higher the productiveness of labour, the greater is the pressure of the labourers on the means of employment, the more precarious, there- fore, becomes their condition of existence, viz., the sale of their own labour-power for the increasing of another's wealth, or for the self-expansion of capital. 32. Under the name of System of Relays, this "plan" was therefore carried out, so that, e.g., the Departement du Nord— has a paid government inspector been appoint- ed. Therefore the constant portion of the value of the week's product is £378. Taking them as a whole, the general movements of wages are exclusively regulated by the expansion and contraction of the industrial reserve army, and these again correspond to the pe- riodic changes, of the industrial cycle. of yarn, so now, 20 lbs. Before passing to the consideration of the extension of that legislation in England, we shall shortly no- tice certain clauses contained in the Factory Acts, and not relat- ing to the hours of work. The rooms, in which labourers in many cases live, are situated in confined and unwhole- some yards or courts, and for space, light, air, and cleanliness, are models of insufficiency and insalubrity, and a disgrace to any civilised community; in them men, women, and children lie at night huddled together; and as regards the men, the night-shift succeed the day-shift, and the day-shift the night-shift in unbroken series for some time together, the beds having scarcely time to cool; the whole house badly supplied with water and worse with privies; dirty, unventilated, and pestiferous." 2 The price per week of such lodgings ranges from 8d. They developed gradually out of circum- stances as natural laws of the modern mode of production. On the other hand, the actual return of the soil rose rapidly. or Is. 6d. The exchange of commodities, therefore, first begins on the boundaries of such communities, at their points of contact with other similar communities, or with members of the latter. An instrument of labour is a thing, or a complex of things, which the labourer interposes between himself and the subject of his labour, and which serves as the conductor of his activity. We deal only with the forcible means employed. But it flourishes, it lets loose its whole energy, it attains its adequate classical form, only where the labourer is the private owner of his own means of labour set in action by himself: the peasant of the land which he cultivates, the artisan of the tool which he handles as a virtuoso. Thus the "indicated" or "commercial" horse-power of an engine is expressed by a mathematical formula, involving diameter of cylinder, length of stroke, piston speed, and steam pressure, simultaneously, and showing what mul- tiple of 33,000 pounds is really raised by the engine in a minute. 69.) After Laing has illus- trated this by statistics, he continues: "If the people were all in easy cir- cumstances, the world would soon be depopulated." 644 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION army of labourers. Definite historical conditions are nee essary that a product may become a commodity. On the other hand, the £3,000, the money-value of the machine, expresses all the labour expended on its production, no matter in what proportion this labour con- stitutes wages for the workman, and surplus-value for the capital- ist. They are now all "set free," and every new bit of capital looking out for employment can dispose of them. 1 Hith- 1 "Quando si perfezionano le arti, che non e altro che la scoperta di nuove vie, onde si possa compiere una manufattura con meno gente o (che e lo stesso) in minor tempo di prima." (Galiani, 1. If the labourer does not possess the average capacity, if he cannot in consequence supply a certain minimum of work per day, he is dismissed. Although, in the case we have supposed, we are ignorant of the actual length of the working-day, and of the dura- tion in days or weeks of the labour-process, as also of the number of labourers employed, yet the rate of surplus-value— accurately dis- ! i n .. Thus the Physiocrats insist that only agricultural labour is productive, since that alone, they say, yields a surplus-value. That, at the first returning de- mand for labour, there would be a deficiency. Why? Among the instruments of labour, those of a mechanical nature, which, taken as a whole, we may call the bone and mus- cles of production, offer much more decided characteristics of a given epoch of production, than those which, like pipes, tubs, baskets, jars, &c, serve only to hold the materials for labour, which latter class, we may in a general way, call the vascular system of production. Except in so far as they whom his labour enriches, see fit to treat him with a kind of pitiful indulgence, he is quite peculiarly helpless in the matter. "The modern steam-engine of 100 horse-power is capable of being driven at a much greater force than formerly, arising from improvements in its construction, the capacity and construction of the boilers, &c," ... In Moldavia conditions are still harder. But even in the colonies properly so called, the Christian char- acter of primitive accumulation did not belie itself. It produced, so early as 1851, over 180,000,000 of pens yearly, and con- sumed 120 tons of steel. 2 "But it must be borne in mind that those improvements, though carried out fully in some establishments, are by no means general, and are not capa- ble of being brought into use in many of the old manufactories without an expenditure of capital beyond the means of many of the present occupiers." "I cannot but rejoice," writes Sub-Insp. In the United States it is as yet only virtually that agricultural machines replace labourers; in other words, they allow of the cultivation by the farmer of a larger surface, but do not actually expel the labourers employed. 159: "The nominal price of day-labour is at present no more than about four times, or, at most, five times higher than it was in the year 1514. Now listen how those com- modities speak through the mouth of the economist. Econ.,' VoL I, p. Great part of this newly built in good style; demand for houses appears very marked, since very miserable cots let at Is. to Is. 3d. . Meyer," Berlin, 1881, I. The separation of property from labour has become the necessary consequence of a law that apparently originated in their identity. In the manufacture of paper-hangings the coarser sorts are printed by machine; the finer by hand (block-printing). 20 yards of linen =1 coat, or 20 yards of linen are worth 1 coat. Income from profits. The new value actually created in the process, the value produced, or value-product, is therefore not the same as the value of the product; it is not, as it would at first sight appear (c+v)+s or £410 const. 630 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION composition of capital, of a more accelerated diminution of its variable, as compared with its constant constituent. When the labourer co-operates systematically with others, he strips off the fetters of his individuality, and develops the ca- pabilities of his species. To-day the product satisfies a social want. c, p. Cooksley are subject to the disadvantage of having their boys enticed to continue their labour elsewhere after 6 p. Only a degree of intensity above the national average affects, in a given country, the measure of value by the mere duration of the working-time. E.\ 628 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION only to change the quantitative groupings of the constituent parts of social capital. And so, too, is the value of labour-power, be- cause it depends on the values of commodities. If, on the other hand, in consequence, say, of improved looms, this labour-time be re- duced by one-half, the value of the linen would fall by one-half. Not only is the detail work distributed to the different individuals, but the individual himself is made the automatic motor of a fractional operation, 2 and the absurd fable of Menenius Agrippa, which makes man a mere fragment of his own body, becomes realised. With a given rate of surplus-value, and a given value of la- bour-power, therefore, the masses of surplus-value produced vary directly as the amounts of the variable capitals advanced. If the variable capital diminishes, and at the same time the rate of surplus-value increases in the same ratio, the mass of surplus-value produced remains unaltered. The mech- anism that is made up of numerous individual detail labourers belongs to the capitalist. Half the workers are children under thirteen, and young persons under eighteen. 2 1. Instead of converting surplus-value into capital, he, on the contrary, by the purchase of those commodities and that labour, consumes or expends it as revenue. We have seen that when commodities are exchanged, their exchange-value manifests itself as something totally independent of their use-value. 2 1. per week, but to lodge, to clothe, to feed, and to provide medical attendance and proper superintendence for 50 or 100 of these boys, and to set aside some remuneration for them, could not be accomplished for 4s. 322.) Most recently a much more striking example offers. How could factory inspectors, with this complex book-keeping in respect to each individual child or young person, enforce the legally determined work-time and the granting of the legal meal-times? But the parents refused to sell the "half-timers" cheaper than the "full-timers." .Hence the substitution of machinery for the "half-timers." 2 Before the labour of women and of children under 10 years of age was forbid- den in mines, capitalists considered the employment of naked women and girls, often in company with men, so far sanctioned by 1 Hence in a communistic society there would be a very different scope for the employment of machinery than there can be in a bourgeois society. For instance, the attendance on one day might be from 8 to 11 a. 235, 237. It is characterised by maximum of working-time, and minimum of wages. It is the fact that their respective products are commod- ities. Edit. Sailor in the Navy . 2 Sismondi's analysis of accumulation suffers from the great defect, that he contents himself, to too great an extent, with the phrase "conversion of revenue into capital," without" fathoming the material conditions of this operation. We have then a third peculiarity of the equivalent form, namely, that the labour of private individuals takes the form of its oppo- site, labour directly social in its form. of good wheaten bread, for men — more; for y the weekly average of adult men and women, at least 28,600 grains of carbon and 1,330 grains of nitrogen. The quantity of these necessaries is known at any given epoch of a given society, and can therefore be treated as a constant magnitude. It is the expression of equiv- alence between different sorts of commodities that alone brings into relief the specific character of value-creating labour, and this it does by actually reducing the different varieties of labour COMMODITIES 51 embodied in the different kinds of commodities to their common quality of human labour in the abstract. "The fourth period," the last 30 years of the 18th century, "is that in which expense and luxury have made great progress, and was supported by a trade extended by means of riders and factors through every part of Europe." x What would the good Dr. Aikin say if he could rise from his grave and see the Manchester of to-day? The variable capital annually laid out amounts, therefore, to £3,000. The quaker gentlemen were mulcted in £20. lib. They favoured artificially, therefore, the cultivation of corn. i. 33, ed. The mass of social wealth, overflowing with the advance of accumulation, and transformable into additional capital, thrusts itself frantically into old branches of production, whose market suddenly expands, or into newly formed branches, such as railways, &c, the need for which grows out of the development of the old ones. . The purchaser has the commodity, the seller has the money, i.e., a commodity ready to go into circulation at any time. All medical testimony agrees on this point, and personal observation at different times has convinced me of 294 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION of the Factory Inspector, renewed every 6 months, the mischief continues to this hour. The degradation, in its social bearing on the girls, is deplorable in the extreme. It was computed that the number of persons who tilled their own land was greater than the number of those who farmed the land of others." Macaulay: "History of England," 10th ed., 1854, I. Not a fibre of it is changed, but anew social soul has popped into its body. 1.56 fr. IV., ch. Ce fruit est le revenu qui nait du capital" (Sismondi: "Nouv. "Le paysan (in Silesia, under Freder- ick II.) est serf." Nevertheless, these serfs possess common lands. Third Report. But in the colo- nies this pretty fancy is torn asunder. necessary to enable him to perform his labour ... c, pp. There is left the sum of £3 10s. To this the Children's Employment Commissioners answer: "The circumstances of this case are precisely analogous to that of the paper-stainers, dealt with in our first report. For 30 years, however, the concessions conquered by the workpeople were purely nominal. c, pp. It is true that this takes place, more or less, with every lengthening of the working-day; but in the case under consideration, the change is more marked, because the capital converted into the instruments of labour pre- ponderates to a greater degree. Just as little does it concern us, 1 We here take no account of export trade, by means of which a nation can change articles of luxury either into means of production or means of subsistence, and vice versa. They paid 10 hours' wages for 12 or 15 hours' lordship over labour-power. This is the reason why the products of labour become commodities, social things whose qualities are at the same time perceptible and imperceptible by the senses. The fewer the number of natural wants imperatively calling for satisfaction, and the greater the natural fertility of the soil and the favourableness of the climate, so much less is the labour- time necessary for the maintenance and reproduction of the producer. And vice versa, if the latter be given, and we require to find the surplus- value. go to 3 waste. 36.) This remarkable anonymous work, written in the last cen- tury, bears no date. c, p. In the notorious district of Bethnal Green, a public market is held every Monday and Tuesday morning, where children of both sexes from 9 years of age upwards, hire themselves out to the silk manufac- turers. In order to act as such a mirror of value, the labour of tailoring must reflect nothing besides its own abstract quality of being human labour generally. As with other commodi- ties, this value was determined by the cost of production. In England the horse-power of an engine was formerly cal- culated from the diameter of its cylinder, now the actual horse-power shown hv the indicator is taken. Say; what is "valeur"? Here we find, amongst others, the following edifying passage: "Under the present law, no mill in which persons under 18 years of age are employed, ... The man whose whole life is spent in performing a few simple operations . 1860, p. The master's machinery" (which we now learn can be replaced with advantage in 12 months) "really plays a far more important part in the business of production than the labour and skill of the operative" (who cannot now be- replaced under 30 years), "which six months' education can teach, and a com- mon labourer can learn." (See ante, p. The magnates of this trade had not only over- produced beyond all measure during the overtrading time, but they had, besides, engaged in enormous contracts on the specu- lation that credit would be forthcoming to an equivalent extent. The workers consist of men and women, adults and children of both sexes. If we make abstraction from its use-value, we make abstraction at the same time from the material elements and shapes that make the product a use-value; we see in it no longer a table, a house, yarn, or any other useful thing. "I metalli ... 3 When Anacharsis was asked for what purposes the Greeks used mon- ey, he replied, "For reckoning." (Athen. Sixth Report of the Medical Officer of the Privy Council, 1863." Published in London 1864. All this was at Feltham, also tells of cases where all relief was denied to certain families "because they were sending their children to school!" 1 Wherever handicraft-machines, driven by men, compete directly or indirectly with more developed machines driven by mechanical power, a great change takes place with regard to the labourer who drives the machine. Capitalist production once assumed, then, all other circum- stances remaining the same, and given the length of the working- day, the quantity of surplus-labour will vary with the physical conditions of labour, especially with the fertility of the soil. capital. The circulating medium was transformed into a hoard, because the process stopped short after the first phase, because the converted shape of the commodity, viz., the money, was withdrawn from circulation. G. Example: Bradford (Yorkshire). s. The labourer needs time for satisfying his intellectual and social wants, the extent and number of which are conditioned by the general state of social advancement. That second commodity is not the one whose value is expressed. c, p. To that daily toil there will then have to be add- ed, as though it were nothing, the daily need of walking six or eight miles for power of earning his bread. If, e.g., in consequence of fa- vourable circumstances, accumulation in a particular sphere of production becomes especially active, and profits in it, being greater than the average profits, attract additional capital, of course the demand for labour rises and wages also rise. Here and there one man gets a living by sewing, another by cutting out shoes; one does nothing but cut out clothes, another nothing but sew the pieces to- gether. These machines were invented in Germany. Daire. {Added in the 4th German edition.— The Krefeld silk industry also has its tale to tell anent this subject.)—/* 1 . It was in fact by the cheapness of the human sweat and the human blood, which were converted into commodities, that the markets were constantly being extended, and continue daily to be extend- ed; more especially was this the case with England's colonial markets, where, besides, English tastes and habits prevail. For the capitalist, however, this use is still more limited. Say says: "Les epargnes des riches se font aux depens des pauvres." "The Roman proletarian lived almost entirely at the expense of society.... 15, 39, 41. Lastly, suppose that every piece of linen in the market contains no more labour-time than is socially necessary. They had formed the backbone of Cromwell's strength, and, even according to the confession of Macaulay, stood in favourable contrast to the drunken squires and to their serv- jurist of that time, Sergeant Snigge (later a judge under James I.) for his opinion. 2 In the light of his dogma the commonest phenomena 1 Compare among others, Jeremy Bentham: "Theorie des Peines et des Recompenses," traduct. But if the necessary labour vanish, so too does the surplus-labour, since it is only a function of the for- m, .. The larger English glass manufac- turers, for instance, make their own earthenware melting-pots, be- cause, on the quality of these depends, to a great extent, the suc- cess or failure of the process. In the same way, cloth manufacture, as also a whole series of other manufac- tures, arose by combining different handicrafts together under the control of a single capitalist. In the form of society now under consideration, the behaviour of men in the social process of production is purely atomic. 1 Just as little can it originate in the second act of circulation, the re-sale of the commodity, which does no more than transform the article from its bodily form back again into its money-form. 2 "It (the inquiry of 1861) ... "Of machinery, perhaps self-acting mules are as dangerous as any other kind. On the other hand, the commodity that figures as the equivaleni caunot at the same time assume the COMMODITIES 49 relative form. 2 Sismondi; "Nouv. The ownership of past unpaid labour is thenceforth the sole condition for the appropriation of living un- paid labour on a constantly increasing scale. T Surplus-labour Surplus-value _ Surplus-product Working-day ""Value of the Product - Total Product One and the same ratio is here expressed as a ratio of labour- times, of the values in which those labour-times are embodied, and of the products in which those values exist. (1. 71.) 2 "Easy labour is transmitted skill." (Th. Ilodgskin, "Popular Politi- cal Economy," p. If the price of each article be £2, and the sum of the prices to be realised be consequently £8, it follows that £8 in money must go into circulation. which gives for the value of 10,000 lbs. We have, therefore, now to consider exchange from a formal point of view; to investigate the change of form or metamorphosis of commodities which effectuates the social cir- culation of matter. [sic/] or before 2 p. "The time shall be reg- ulated by a public clock," for example, the nearest railway clock, by which the factory clock is to be set. m., 15 minutes. W. On the one hand, with the throw- ing of small holdings into large ones, and the change of arable into pasture land, a larger part of the whole produce was trans- formed into surplus-produce. The lending out of these individually, independent- ly of the gang, is his second trade. of Pact., 31st Oct., 1865," p. w 5 « a o *^ U (9 a> <« 3 2— c ath-ra Imona ns per les. He rendered undying service to the English working-class. If they find it, and thus renew the bond between them and the means of subsistence, this takes place only by the intermediary of a new and additional capital that is seeking investment; not at all by the intermediary of the capital that formerly employed them and was afterwards converted into machinery. And this the apologist calls a compensation for the misery, the sufferings, the possible death of the displaced labourers 640 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION during the transition period that banishes them into the indus- trial reserve army! The demand for labour is not identical with increase of capital, nor supply of labour with increase of the work- ing-class. The Act comprises: 1) Textile Mills. 1816.) IV. These are the conditions of the problem. 5 It is constantly changing from one form to the other without thereby becoming lost, and thus assumes an auto- matically active character. In fact, the events that transformed the small peasants into wage-labourers, and their means of subsistence and of labour into material elements of capital, created, at the same time, a home- market for the latter. 3 William Cobbett: "A History of the Protestant Reformation," § 471. may be of the meanest description. But, no doubt, Herr Wil- helm Roscher, by "primitive forest" means his native heath of Luneburg. This is co-operation in its most elementary form. 180.) For the "labour question" in English agricultural districts, differently from the rest of the civilised world, means the landlords' and farm- ers' question, viz., how it is possible, despite an always increasing exodus of the agricultural folk, to keep up a sufficient relative surplus-population in the country, and by means of it keep the wages of the agricultural labourer at a minimum? 2 The introduction of this and other machinery into match-making caused in one department alone 230 young persons to be replaced by 32 boys and girls of 14 to 17 years of age. Consequently, he takes less time in doing it, than the artificer who performs a whole series of operations in succession. He is at liberty to set the 100 men to work, without letting them co-operate. The particular functions of money which it performs, either as the mere equivalent of commodities, or as means of circulation, or means of payment, as hoard or as universal money, point, accord- ing to the extent and relative preponderance of the one function or the other, to very different stages in the process of social produc- tion. It produces, there- lore, a new class of small villagers who, while following the cultivation of the soil as an accessary calling, find their chief occu- pation in industrial labour, the products of which they sell to the manufacturers directly, or through the medium of merchants. It was expressly forbidden to treat money as a commodity. m., on another day from 1 p. c. TIME-WAGES 545 as to the income of the labourer's family, as soon as the quantity of labour expended by the head of the family is increased by the labour of the members of his family. or how could this imaginary value have' maintained itself?" But the following shows how little he himself understood about the matter: "Silver was exchanged in proportion to the value in use it possessed, consequently in proportion to its real value. The amount of exploitation is here measured by 5 hours. It is the most powerful weapon for repressing strikes, those peri- odical revolts of the wo.'king-class against the autocracy of 436 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION capital. Looked at in this way, exchange is for him simply a private transaction. Such a law exists; stated simply, it is as follows: the issue of paper money must not exceed in amount the gold (or silver as the case may be) which would actually use of gold in the main payments necessarily implies also its use in the re- tail trade: those who have gold coin offering them for small purchases, and receiving with the commodity purchased a balance of silver in return; by which means the surplus of silver that would otherwise encumber the retail dealer, is drawn off and dispersed into general circulation. The result is embodied in Mr. Scriven's Report of 1841 to the "Children's Employment Commissioners," in the report of Dr. Greenhow of 1860 published by order of the medical officer of the Privy Council (Public Health, 3rd Report, 112-113), lastly, in the report of Mr. Longe of 1862 in the "First Report of the Chil- dren's Employment Commission, of the 13th June, 1863." For my purpose it is enough to take, from the reports of 1860 and 1863, some depositions of the exploited children themselves. This was its method of primitive accumulation. 2 The manufacture of lucifer matches dates from 1833, from the discovery of the method of applying phosphorus to the match itself. xxii., n. E. The labour does therefore not di- minish in the same ratio as its productivity increases. That money is a commodity 1 is therefore a new discovery only for those who, when they analyse it, start from its fully de- veloped shape. Here we hesitate. 2 It is no longer a mere accident, that capitalist and labourer confront each other in the market as buyer and seller. All that I wish to draw attention to here is the existence of an irresistible tendency towards the general application of those principles. You may be a model citizen, perhaps a member of the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, and in the odour of sanctity to boot; but the thing that you represent face to face with me has no heart in its breast. Commodities, first of all, enter into the process of exchange just as they are. 480, Note.) "The amount of capital devoted to the maintenance of labour may vary, independently of any changes in the whole amount of capital.... To sell commodities above their value to such a class, is only to crib back again a part of the money previously given to it. One of the great London branches of industry involved in the catastrophe was iron shipbuilding. The labour itself, owing to the feverish haste of the machinery, demands unceasing application of skill and movement, under the control of a watchfulness that never tires, and it seems somewhat hard, to let parents apply the term "idling" to their own children, who, after allow- ing for meal-times, are fettered for 10 whole hours to such an occupation, in such an atmosphere.... The money wage rose, but not in proportion to the depreciation of money and the correspond- ing rise in the prices of commodities. m. The effect of all these possible different variations, on the relative value of a commodity, may be deduced from the results of I., II., and III. * It is evident that whenever it costs as much labour to produce a machine as is saved by the employment of that machine, there is nothing but a transposition of labour; consequently the total labour required to produce a commodity is not lessened or the productiveness of labour is not increased. During their currency, coins wear away, some more, others less. 1857.— 1 in 13. "Now, as the quantity produced must, in the main, be regu- lated by the speed of the machinery, it must be the interest of the mill-owner to drive it at the utmost rate of speed consistent with these following conditions, viz., the preservation of the machinery from too rapid deterioration; the preservation of the quality of the article manufactured; and the capability of the workman to follow the motion without a greater exertion than he can sustain for a constancy. But the variable capital of a capitalist is the expression in money of the total value of all the labour-powers that he employs simultaneously. more refined press confined itself to reflections on the coarse degradation of the agricultural population who are capable of selling their children into such slavery! Under the accursed conditions to which these "delicate" people condemn the agricultural labourer, it would not be surprising if he ate his own children. More money is withdrawn from circulation at the finish than was thrown into it at the start. "Je considere done les machines comme des moyens d'augmenter (virtuelle- ment) le nombre des gens industrieux qu'on n'est pas oblige de nourrir. of cotton never becomes a constituent element of the yarn, yet assuming this amount of waste to be normal and inevitable under average conditions of spinning, its value is just as surely transferred to the value of the yarn, as is the value of the 100 lbs. It recites, among other things, that many farms and large flocks of cattle, especially of sheep, are concentrated in the hands of a few men, whereby the rent of land has much risen and tillage has fall- en off, churches and houses have been pulled down, and marvellous numbers of people have been deprived of the means wherewith 720 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION to maintain themselves and their families. MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 413 mons the following statements, supported by documentary evi- dence: "The labour performed by those engaged in the processes of manufacture, is three times as great as in the beginning of such operations. This division of a prod- uct into a useful thing and a value becomes practically important, only when exchange has acquired such an extension that useful articles are produced for the purpose of being exchanged, and their character as values has therefore to be taken into account, beforehand, during production. 1848, p. 1 " 7 27 Ebenezer Street .... It places under protection a new category of workers, viz., the women over 18. ! As a matter of fact, every machine is a combination of those simple powers, no matter how they may be disguised. COMPULSORY LIMITATION BY LAW OF THE WORKING-TIME. At the time of the 10 hours' agitation, the masters cried out that the work- ing mob petitioned in the hope of obtaining 12 hours' wages for 10 hours' work. "The poor stand still, because the rich have no money to em- ploy them, though they have the same land and hands to provide victuals and clothes, as ever they had;... 212. This surplus-value is the difference between the value of the prod- uct and the value of the elements consumed in the formation of that product, in other words, of the means of production and the labour-power. By means, therefore, of the value-relation expressed in our equation, the bodily form of commodity B becomes the value- form of commodity A, or the body of commodity B acts as a mirror to the value of commodity A. 2,046 152 12 1861 2,715 163 9 1868 2,405 131 13 United Kingdom . 31, 32. Here we may say, with the German proverb: caught together, hung together. 1 No doubt, 1 Goni. l 1 In France, the regisseur, steward, collector of dues for the feudal lords during the earlier part of the^middle ages, soon became an homme d'affaires, who by extortion, cheating, &c, swindled himself into a capitalist. The hands on strike, mothers of families as well as girls, offered to resume work if the time-keeper were replaced -by a clock, and a more reasonable scale of fines were introduced. Our natural intercourse as commodities proves it. He was so before he became buyer; he had already lost 10% in selling before he gained 10% as buyer. In the district to which I belong there are not a sufficient number of inspectors. Besides these material differences of their use-values, there is only one other difference between commodi- ties, namely, that between their bodily form and the form into which they are converted by sale, the difference between commodi- ties and money. Mr. Pusey, Chairman of the Royal Agricultural Society, de- clares that the (relative) expenses of farming have been reduced nearly one half by the introduction of new machinery. 10. The continual re-transformation of surplus-value into capital now appears in the shape of the increas- ing magnitude of the capital that enters into the process of pro- duction. So in Eng- lish to save has the same two meanings: sauver and epargner. If the rate of surplus-value doubles, or the working-day, instead of being extended from 6 to 9, is extended from 6 to 12 hours and at the same time variable capital is lessened by half, and reduced to 150s., it yields also a surplus-value of 150s. In the economic domain, e.g., financiers, stock-exchange speculators, merchants, shopkeepers skim the cream; in civil matters, the lawyer fleeces his clients; in politics the representative is of more importance than the voters, the minis- ter than the sovereign; in religion God is pushed into the background by the "Mediator," and the latter again is shoved back by the priests, the inevitable middlemen between the good shepherd and his sheep. i, book i., ch. Its expropriating efficacy is still further heightened by the system of protection, which forms one of its integral parts. A locomotive, for instance, consists of more than 5,000 inde- pendent parts. Their growing wealth, and the relatively diminished number of workmen required to produce the necessaries of life beget, simultaneously with the rise of new and luxurious wants, the means of satisfying those wants. Merivale: "Lectures on Colonisation and Colonies," 1841. 5 3 8 " 12. The opposition against the establishment of new manufactures, pro- ceeds from the guilds and privileged towns, not from the work- people. The increase of the population of the country parishes is 6.5 per cent., and of the towns 17.3 per cent. Forcible reduction of wages below this value plays, however, in practice too important a part, for us not to pause upon it for a moment. It is an undoubted fact that machinery, as such, is not re- sponsible for "setting free" the workman from the means of sub- sistence. They are used for manure, for making bed- flocks, for shoddy, and they serve as the raw material of paper. "Owing to the men working days and nights in alternate weeks, the men would be separated half the time from their boys, and would lose half the profit which they make from them. Just as, therefore, in viewing the coat and linen as values, we abstract from their different use-values, so it is with the labour represented by those values: we disregard the difference between its useful forms, weaving and tailoring. 143,966,106 lbs. It might, as Mr. Potter says, requiresome time to reproduce the workers, but, having machinists and capital- ists at hand, we could always find thrifty, hard, industrious men wherewith to improvise more master-manufacturers than we can ever want. Even when times of peace came, they were doomed to complete inactivity, because the rich were in possession of the soil, and used slaves instead of freemen in the tilling of it." (Appian: "Civil Wars," I. Eden's "The State of the Poor," London, 1797. Turn and examine a single commodity, by itself, as we will, yet in so far as it remains an object of value, it seems impossible to grasp it. To you, therefore, belongs the use of my daily labour- power. 6 by 6 ft. Biese. On the discovery of money, barter of neces- sity developed into xotTirjUxT), into trading in commodities, and this again, in opposition to its original tendency, grew into Chrematistic, into the art of making money. So long, during the 15th century, as the independent peasant and the farm-labour- er working for himself as well as for wages, enriched themselves by their own labour, the circumstances of the farmer, and his GENESIS OF THE CAPITALIST FARMER 743 field of production, were equally mediocre. First metamorphosis, or sale The leap taken by value from the body of the commodity, into the body of the gold, is, as I have elsewhere called it, the salto mortale of the commodity. Thus, instead of costing Ireland anything, emigration forms one of the most lucrative branches of its export trade. 2 1 Article I. The competition thus created between the labourers allows the capitalist to beat down the price of labour, whilst the falling price of labour allows him, on the other hand, to screw up still further the working-time. Neither is it enough that they are compelled to sell it voluntarily. 1 have stated in "Zur Kritik, &c," p. In this way it is possible with an increasing productiveness of labour, for the price of labour-power to keep on falling, and yet this fall to be accompanied by a constant growth in the mass of the labourer's means of subsistence. . c, p. From the economic standpoint this explanation is worth noth- ing, because the historical element is wanting. .the bushel of wheat shall cost five shillings and that he (a manufacturer) earns a shilling by his labour, he then would be obliged to work five days only in a week. Hence, when in 1844 the re- duction of the working-day to less than twelve hours was being de- bated, the masters almost unanimously declared "that their over- lookers in the different rooms took good care that the hands lost no time," that "the extent of vigilance and attention on the part of the workmen was hardly capable of being increased," and, there- fore, that the speed of the machinery and other conditions remain- ing unaltered, "to expect in a well-managed factory any impor- tant result from increased attention of the workmen was an absurdity." 2 This assertion was contradicted by experiments. By a person in business. 626 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION Capital grows in one place to a huge mass in a single hand, because it has in another place been lost by many. 10 -^ d. 4 1 "L'argent se partage entre les nations relativement au besoin qu'elles en ont ... 416.) Long before Ricardo, Arthur Young, a fanatical upholder of surplus- produce, for the rest, a rambling, uncritical writer, whose reputation is in the inverse ratio of his merit, says, "Of what use, in a modern kingdom, would be a whole province thus divided [in the old Roman manner, by small independent peasants], however well cultivated, except for the mere purpose of breeding men, which taken singly is a most useless purpose?" (Arthur Young: "Political Arithmetic, &c." London, 1774, p. It can, therefore, be assumed by any commodity. 1 But no sooner does coin leave the mint, than it im- mediately finds itself on the high-road to the melting pot. Since the standard of money is on the one hand purely conventional, and must on the other hand find general accept- ance, it is in the end regulated by law. I have another document sent to me in 1842, stating that the la- bour is progressively increasing — increasing not only because the distance to be travelled is greater, but because the quantity of goods produced is multiplied, while the hands are fewer in pro- portion than before; and, moreover, because an inferior species of cotton is now often spun, which it is more difficult to work . 1 But, although the money that performs the functions of a measure of value is only ideal money, price depends entirely upon the actual substance that is money. The more the di- vision increases, the more does the constant employment of a given number of labourers require a greater outlay of capital in tools, raw material, &c." (Storch: "Cours d'Econ. 267.) Franklin is unconscious that by estimating the value of everything in labour, he makes abstrac- tion from any difference in the sorts of labour exchanged, and thus reduces them all to equal human labour. One and the same commodity, the linen, opens the series of its own metamorphoses, and completes the metamorphosis of another (the wheat). The circuit M— G— M, on the contrary, commences with money and ends with money. Be- sides they, with the rest of the peasants, enjoyed the usufruct of the common land, which gave pasture to their cattle, furnished them with timber, fire-wood, turf, &c. Conf. He adds maliciously: "We were ready enough to interfere for the employer, can nothing now be done for the employed?" LEGISLATION AGAINST THE EXPROPRIATED 739 clearly in the fact, that indeed a maximum of wages is dictated by the State, but on no account a minimum. 118. sellers not enriched ... It has not done so with labour, for much machinery has been idle last year for want of hands." ("Rep. c, p. 56. Hence, in the value of the product, there is a re- appearance of the value of the means of production, but there is, strictly speaking, no reproduction of that value. 223. The capitalist class is constantly giving to the labouring class order-notes, in the form of money, on a portion of the commodities produced by the latter and appropriated by the former. 1 "For two-fold is the use of every object.... 1808.) After some further crooked questions from these bourgeois, the secret of their "sympathy" for widows, poor families, &c, comes out at last, "The coal proprietor appoints certain gentlemen to take the oversight of the workings, and it is their policy, in order to receive approbation, to place things on the most economical basis they can, and these girls are employed at from Is. up to Is. 6d. (Galiani: Delia Moneta, p 221, V III of Custodi's collection of "Scrittori Classici Italiani di Economia Politica." Parte Moderna, Milano, 1803.) COMMODITIES 75 gold and a pound of iron in spite of their different physical and chemical qualities appear to be of equal weight. c, p. 1 The contests about wages in Manufacture, pre-suppose manu- facture, and are in no sense directed against its existence. The world would still be without rail- ways if it had had to wait until accumulation had got a few indi- vidual capitals far enough to be adequate for the construction of a railway. The additional capitals formed in the normal course of accu- mulation (see Chapter XXIV, Section 1) serve particularly as vehicles for the exploitation of new inventions and discoveries, and industrial improvements in general. S. Thus real changes in the magnitude of value are neither un- equivocally nor exhaustively reflected in their relative expression, that is, in the equation expressing the magnitude of relative value. MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OF COMMODITIES 113 It is constantly being precipitated into new places in the arena of circulation vacated by other commodities. 1 Nevertheless an essential difference at once 1 Before the epoch of Mechanical Industry, the wool manufacture was the predominating manufacture in England. But soon such a cloud of dust in the way of petitions from the masters overwhelmed the Home Secretary, Sir George Grey, that in a circular of August 5th, 1848, he recommends the inspectors not "to lay informations 1 The nature of capital remains the same in its developed as in its undeveloped form. 242. to 8.30 p. c, p. 16, 17.) "The same cause which may increase the net revenue of the country may at the same time ren- der the population redundant, and deteriorate the condition of the labourer." (Ricardo, 1. Then he turns round and seeks to reform the actual production of commodities, and the actual legal system corresponding thereto, in accordance with this ideal. Every change in the amount of the equivalent that he receives appears to him, therefore, necessarily as a change in the value or price of his 12 hours' work. 1846. Before the famine, the great mass of agricultural wages were paid in kind, only the smallest part in money; to-day, pay- ment in money is the rule. c.) EXPROPRIATION OF AGRICULTURAL POPULATION 731 In the same line you have the Black Mount, an immense waste also recently erected. c, pp. This figure, compared with that of the daily mainte- nance of the labourer, shows a difference of 13 centimes. 2 F. . Your workpeople will in future spend one hour and a half less time in reproducing or replacing the capital that has been advanced.— If, on the other hand, he did not believe them with- out further inquiry, but, as being an expert in such matters, deemed an analysis necessary, then he ought, in a question that is concerned exclusively with the relations of net profit to the length of the working-day, before all things to have asked the manufacturers, to be careful not to lump together machinery, workshops, raw material, and labour, but to be good enough to place the constant capital, invested in buildings, machinery, raw material, &c, on one side of the account, and the capital ad- vanced in wages on the other side. l The implements of labour, in the form of machinery, necessi- tate the substitution of natural forces for human force, and the conscious application of science, instead of rule of thumb. In order to convert this additional sum of £2,000 into capital, the master-spinner will, all circumstances remaining as before, advance four- fifths of it (£1,600) in the purchase of cotton, &c, and one-fifth (£400) in the purchase of additional spinners, who will 1 "Accumulation of capital; the employment of a portion of revenue as capital." (Malthusf "Definitions, &c," ed. Hence the elementary form of value of a commodity is the elementary form in which the contrast contained in that commodity, between use-value and value, becomes apparent. He nominally compares the life of the English and French manufacturing labourer, but in the words just quoted he is painting, as he himself confesses in his confused way, the French agri- cultural labourers. 3 If the labourer consumes his disposable time for himself, he robs the capitalist. Reaction of the Factory System on Manufacture and Domestic Industries Along with the development of the factory system and of the revolution in agriculture that accompanies it, production in all the other branches of industry not only extends, but al- ters its character. Receiving a refusal, he at first kept quiet. In the 15th century the German peasant was nearly everywhere a man, who, whilst subject to certain rents paid in produce and labour was otherwise at least practically free. Capitalist production, by collecting the population in great centres, and causing an ever-increasing preponderance of town population, on the one hand concentrates the historical motive power of society; on the other hand, it dis- turbs the circulation of matter between man and the soil, i. "The effect," says Mr. Lord, "on entering low-ceiled workrooms in which 30 to 40 machine hands are working is unbearable. The labour, however, that forms the substance of value, is homogeneous human labour, expenditure of one uniform la- bour-power. With its fall these were no longer tenable. A large part of this county is new land, marsh for- merly, or even, as in others of the eastern counties just named, won lately from the sea. c, p. In fact, the veiled slavery of Men," 1795, Vol. Value therefore now becomes value in process, money in process, and, as such, capital. 7, n. Bailey.) 50 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION coats, every such statement implies that the linen and coats, as magnitudes of value, are expressions of the same unit, things of the same kind. It is precisely among the workpeople of modern industry that we meet with the shortest duration of life. 408. They may have, after they have done their work, some- times five or six, sometimes only four or five hours' sleep be- fore they begin again. and brings no profit to that country it's kept in, but as it is transported in trade, as well as imported." (John Bellers, "Essays," p. We shall return to the later proposals of the same Commission, which threatened to deprive of their "freedom" all the important branches of English Industry, with the exception of agriculture, mines, and the means of trans- port. It is because all commodities, as values, are realised human labour, and therefore commensurable, that their values can be measured by one and the same special commodity, and the latter be converted into the common measure of their values, i.e., into money. 11-13.) "There are certain expenses upon a mill which go on in the same proportion whether the mill be running short or full time, as, for instance, rent, rates, and taxes, insurance against fire, wages of several permanent servants, deterioration of machinery, with various other charges upon a manufacturing establishment, the proportion of which to profits increases as the production decreases." ("Rep. * ing: 1851, 26,940: 1861, 26,130— fall in consequence of the competition of machinery. Discrete work- shops, for the most part combined with cultivation of smallholdings, are the only free ones." * The expropriation and eviction of a part of the agricultural population not only set free for industrial capi- tal, the labourers, their means of subsistence, and material for labour; it also created the home-market. 2 It will, however, be seen in the following chapter that this law only holds for the form of sur- plus-value dealt with up to the present. Hence, he never comes to see that, if such a thing as the value of labour really existed, and he really paid this value, no capital would exist, his money would not be turned into capital. Hence, if the value of commodity A remain constant, its relative value expressed in commodity B rises and falls inversely as the value of B. £.] 724 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION legal etiquette. And as the greater part of society consists of such ne'er- do-wells, have I not rendered society incalculable service by my instruments of production, my cotton and my spindle, and not only society, but the labourer also, whom in addition I have pro- vided with the necessaries of life? 2 By means of machinery t 1 In the celebrated "Livre des metiers" of Etienne Boileau, we find it prescribed that a journeyman on being admitted among the masters had to swear "to love his brethren with brotherly love, to support them in their respective trades, not wilfully to betray the secrets of the trade, and besides, in the interests of all, not to recommend his own wares by calling the atten- tion of the buyer to defects in the articles made by others." 2 "The bourgeoisie cannot exist without continually revolutionising the instruments of production, and thereby the relations of production and all the social relations. A commodity, in its capacity of a use-value, satisfies a par- ticular want, and is a particular element of material wealth. The young people migrate to the eastern mining districts of Glamorgan and Monmouth. The first metamorphosis of the linen puts these coins into the weaver's pocket, the second draws them out of it. The capitalistic mode of production (essentially the pro- duction of surplus-value, the absorption of surplus-labour), produces thus, with the extension of the working-day, not only the deterioration of human labour-power by robbing it of its normal, moral and physical, conditions of development and function. Factory Inspector Leonard Horner conducted in his own person, and through his sub-inspectors, many examinations of witnesses in the factories of Lancashire. to 7— p. c'est au contraire, grace a Impropriation individuelle du sol qu'il se trouve des houimes n'ayant que leurs bras.... The Speech of Lord Ashley, March 15th, Lond., 1844, p. The landowners turned out the sheep as they once turned out the men from their estates, and welcomed the new tenants — the wild beasts and the feathered birds.... All other circumstances remaining the same, individual capitals, and with them the concentration of the means of produc- tion, increase in such proportion as they form aliquot parts of the total social capital. 2 The use of machinery for the exclusive purpose of cheapen- ing the product, is limited in this way, that less labour must be expended in producing the machinery than is displaced by the employment of that machinery. As a general rule, articles of utility become commodities, only because they are products of the labour of private individuals COMMODITIES 73 or groups of individuals who carry on their work independently of each other. In proportion as machinery, with the aid of a relatively small number of workpeople, increases the mass of raw mate- rials, intermediate products, instruments of labour, &c, the work- ing-up of these raw materials and intermediate products becomes split up into numberless branches; social production increases in diversity. I., I. Our capitalist has two objects in view: in the first place, he wants to produce a use-value that has a value in exchange, that is to say, an article destined to be sold, a commodity; and secondly, he desires to produce a commodity whose value shall be greater than the sum of the values of the commodities used in its pro- duction, that is, of the means of production and the labour-power, that he purchased with his good money in the open market. The extra expenditure of power, demand- ed by every transition from rest to motion, is made up for by pro- longing the duration of the normal velocity when once acquired. To give an idea of the extent of the sphere embraced by the Workshops' Regulation Act in its application, we cite from its interpretation clause, the following passages: "Handicraft shall mean any manual labour exercised by way of trade, or for purposes of gain in, or incidental to, the making any article or part of an article, or in, or incidental to, the altering, repairing, ornamenting, finishing, or otherwise adapt- ing for sale any article." "Workshop shall mean any room or place whatever in the open air or under cover, in which any handicraft is carried on by any child, young person, or woman, and to which and over which the person by whom such child, young person, or woman is employed, has the right of access and control." 1 Senior, "Social Science Congress," pp. 56 ) M. Except in the periods of prosperity, there rages between the capitalists the most furious combat for the share of each in the markets. Geschichte, 1856, p. 'Question: Has not the use of the power-loom su- perseded the use of the hand-loom? 6,297,554 yds. This palpable law is of importance for the clearing up of many phenomena, arising from a tendency (to be worked out later on) of capital to reduce as much as possible the number of labour- ers employed by it, or its variable constituent transformed into labour-power, in contradiction to its other tendency to produce 1 This elementary law appears to be unknown to the vulgar economists, who, upside-down Archimedes, in the determination of the market-price of labour by supply and demand, imagine they have found the fulcrum by means of which, not to move the world, but to stop its motion. 1 This was the gist of the matter, this the masters' interpretation of the 10 hours' law! These were the same unctuous Free-traders, perspiring with the love of humanity, who for full 10 years, dur- ing the Anti-Corn Law agitation, had preached to the operatives, by a reckoning of pounds, shillings, and pence, that with free importation of corn, and with the means possessed by English industry, 10 hours' labour would be quite enough to enrich the capitalists. (The various Statutes were passed between 1836 and 1858.) "Labour performed during a period of 10 hours on any day in all cotton, woollen, silk, paper, glass, and flax factories, or in manufactories of iron and brass, shall be considered a legal day's labour. 1846.-34,540,143 lbs. . It is not the normal maintenance of the labour-power which is to determine the limits of the working-day; it is the greatest possible daily expenditure of labour-power, no matter how diseased, compulsory, and painful it may be, which is to determine the limits of the labourers' period of repose. c, pp. But when- ever the coat assumes in the equation of value, the position of equivalent, its value acquires no quantitative expression; on the omists. — F. Hence, as the use of machinery extends in a given industry, the immediate effect is to increase production in the other in- dustries that furnish the first with means of production. c, p. 1., pp. 66.) 2 A. c.) 466 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION d. Throughout this Book therefore, by constant capital advanced for the production of value, we always mean, unless the context is repugnant thereto, the value of the means of production actually consumed in the process, and that value alone. This is the reason why it results COMMODITIES 59 in a product directly exchangeable with other commodities. Scarcely a room was to let. A single man cannot operate upon Nature without calling his own muscles into play under the control of his own brain. Let no man imagine that this lord, poetic into the bargain, is a physician of the school of Sangrado, who as often as he did not find his patient better, ordered phlebotomy and again phlebotomy, until the patient lost his sickness at the same time as his blood. But looking at things as a whole, all this does not, indeed, depend on the good or ill will of the individual capitalist. 2 By constantly making a part of the hands "supernumerary," mod- ern industry, in all countries where it has taken root, gives a spur to emigration and to the colonisation of foreign lands, which are thereby converted into settlements for growing the raw material of the mother country; just as Australia, for example, was converted into a colony for growing wool. Scrofula attacking the glands, or bones, or other parts of the body, is a disease of two-thirds or more of the potters That the 'degenerescence' of the population of this district is not even greater than it is, is due to the constant recruiting from the adjacent country, and intermarriages with more healthy races." 3 1 Children's Employment Commission. c, p. As late as Charles I.'s reign, 1638, a royal commission was appointed to enforce the carrying out of the old laws, especially that referring to the 4 acres of land. . . 248, 249.) 1 The mandarin Wan-mao-in, the Chinese Chancellor of the Exchequer, took it into his head one day to lay before the Son of Heaven a proposal that secretly aimed at converting the asstgnats of the empire into convert- ible bank-notes. 2 Apart from the new power that arises from the fusion of many forces into one single force, mere social contact begets in most in- dustries an emulation and a stimulation of the animal spirits that heighten the efficiency of each individual workman. Over yonder, in the colonies where the labourers are so "simple" as to "exploit" the capitalist, Mr. Molinari feels a strong itching to set the law of supply and demand, that works elsewhere automatically, on the right road by means of the police. W. Lond., 1861 and 1866. The one with an air of importance, smirking, intent on business; the other, timid and holding back, like one who is bringing his own hide to market and has nothing to expect but — a hiding. (See the above cited Blue book, as also the report of "the committee of 1855 on the adulteration of bread," and Dr. Hassall's "Adulterations Detected," 2nd Ed. Lond. The corpses of machines, tools, workshops, &c, are always sepa- rate and distinct from the product they helped to turn out. Josiah Wedgwood, the inventor of modern pot- tery, himself originally a common workman, said in 1785 before the House of Commons that the whole trade employed from 15,000 to 20,000 people. The reflux itself takes 1 "When a thing is bought in order to be sold again, the sum employed is called money advanced; when it is bought not to be sold, it may be said to be expended." — (James Steuart: "Works," &c. 56, par. Gooksley of Bristol, nail and chain, &c, manufacturers, spontaneously introduced the regulations of the Factory Act into their business. Although we come across the first beginnings of capitalist production as early as the 14th or 15th century, sporadically, in certain towns of the Mediterranean, the capi- talistic era dates from the 16th century. And what sort of workmanship could we ex- pect from such hard-driven animals? Econ.," p. 2 In winter, work was to last from 5 in the morning until dark, with the same intervals. This productiveness is determined by various circumstances, amongst others, by the average amount of skill of the workmen, the state of science, and the degree of its practical application, the social organisation of production, the extent and capabilities of the means of production, and by physical conditions. naturalmente moneta." (Galiani, "Delia moneta" in Custodi's Collection: Parte Moderna t. The iron, as iron, is no more the form of manifestation of weight, than is the sugar-loaf. m. "A man who has plenty of wine and no corn treats with a man who has plenty of corn and no wine; an exchange takes place between them of corn to the value of 50, for wine of the same value. So long as, in a given branch of industry, the factory system extends itself at the expense of the old handicrafts or of manu- facture, the result is as sure as is the result of an encounter be- tween an army furnished with breach-loaders, and one armed with bows and arrows. What makes them exchangeable is the mutual desire of their owners to alie- nate them. 118-20. is .... But the capitalist may safely leave its fulfilment to the labourer's instincts of self-preservation and of propagation. Only one of the houses investigated had 2 bedrooms. Doctor: Marry, all such as have takings of fearmes in their owne manurance [cultivation] at the old rent, for where they pay after the olde rate they sell after the newe — that is, they paye for theire lande good cheape, and sell all things growing thereof deare. This journal, then the most important Liberal organ, sent spe- cial commissioners into the agricultural districts, who did not content themselves with mere general descriptions and statistics* 1 Parry, i. T. Hereafter we shall see that the contrary assumption would make no difference. The circumstance that they were "freed" by the ma- chinery, from the means of purchase, changed them from buyers into non-buyers. Thus in England, dur- ing half a century, lengthening of the working-day went hand in hand with increasing intensity of factory labour. The whole mechanism discloses a systematic division of labour; but a division like that in manufactures is impossible, since the smith and the carpenter, &c, find an unchanging market, and at the most there occur, according to the sizes of the villages, two or three of each, instead of one. Redgrave, out of the 2,109 mills included in his district, 392, or 19% employed less than ten horse-power each; 345, or 16% employed 10 H. Smith: "Wealth of Nations," Bk. v., ch. 2 2 4 " 11. So, too, when I ask why mules are so universally substituted for horses on the farm, the first reason given, and confessedly the most conclusive one, is that horses cannot bear the treat- ment that they always must get from negroes; horses are always soon foundered or crippled by them, while mules will bear cudgelling, or lose a meal or two now and then, and not be materially injured, and they do not take cold or get sick, if neglected or overworked. 2 "Rept. Of this £115,000, each of the twenty-three half- hours of work produces 5-U5ths or one twenty-third. On the subject of the great epochs in the history of the changes in the relative value of gold and silver, see Karl Marx, 1. 1 It is owing to the absence of this kind of co-operation that, in the western part of the United States, quantities of corn, and in those parts of East India where English rule has destroyed the old com- munities, quantities of cotton, are yearly wasted. "The usual terms are Is. 8d. Capital, therefore, announces from its first appearance a new epoch in the process of social production. i. If, on the other hand, the value of the coat sinks by one-half, then 20 yards of linen =2 coats. The lowness of the price of labour acts here as a stimulus to the extension of the labour-time. Total weekly average of butter (fat, etc.) 5 ounces per adult. The value-form must therefore not only express value generally, but also value in definite quan- tity. d. The prices, or quantities of gold, into which the values of commodities are ideally changed, are therefore now expressed in the names of coins, or in the legally valid names of the sub- divisions of the gold standard. Of course, it is also possible, that in G — M — G, the two extremes C — C, say corn and clothes, may represent different quantities of value. When in 1735, John Wyatt brought out his spinning machine, and began the industrial revolution of the 18th century, not a word did he say about an ass driving it instead of a man, and yet this part fell to the ass. They also forcibly rooted out, in their de- pendent countries, all industry, as, e.g., England did with the Irish woollen manufacture. to 9s. Hamburg, 1869, pp. 's time, in taxes pour le roi de Prusse. . In proportion as payments are concentrated at one spot, special institutions and methods are developed for their liquidation. The main point with him is, that the labourer must adapt himself to the work, not the work to the labourer; which latter is unavoidable, it he carries on several trades at once, thus making one or the other of them subor- 366 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION Xenophon, * who with characteristic bourgeois instinct, approaches more nearly to division of labour within the workshop. Sugar (treacle, etc.) varied from 4 ounces weekly for the kid- glovers to 11 ounces for the stocking-makers; and the total average per week for all categories was 8 ounces per adult weekly. Among them are a number of items that do not concern us here, such as rent, rates, and taxes, insurance, salaries of the manager, book-keeper, engineer, and others. 2 And this is what is called: creating capital out of capital. ... Before the revo- lution (1789), the minimum for the infantry in France was 165 centimetres; in 1818 (law of March 10th), 157; by the law of March 21, 1832, 156 c. The cost of weaving apiece of such cloth had already soon after 1850 fallen from 2s. It converts what was formerly variable capital, invested in labour-power, into machinery which, being constant capital, does not produce surplus-value. * Capitalist production, therefore, under its aspect of a contin- uous connected process, of a process of reproduction, produces not only commodities, not only surplus-value, but it also produces and reproduces the capitalist relation; on the one side the capital- ist, on the other the wage-labourer. . A, therefore, may get, for the same exchange-value, more corn, and B more wine, than each would respectively get without any exchange by pro- ducing his own corn and wine. Provided its net real income, its rent and profits, be the same, it is of no importance whether the nation consists of 10 or of 12 millions of inhabitants." (Ric. 43, 44.) 2 That the price of each single kind of commodity forms a part of the sum of the prices of all the commodities in circulation, is a self-evident proposition. A critical history of technology would show how little any of the inven- tions of the 18th century are the work of a single individual. Thus it first took root in Holland. The circulation itself, of course, gives no clue to the ori- gin of this stagnation; it merely puts in evidence the phenomenon itself. What do these people want, who cry out for money? This part of capital is continually being transformed from a constant into a variable magnitude. — M. On this occasion he commits the anachronism of making these men apply to the calculation, so far as their implements have to be taken into account, the annuity tables in current use on the London Exchange in the year 1817. 350, 351.) On the contrary, lowness of wages produces, in its turn, dearness of labour. If we take this, together with the swift, unbroken extension of the markets, viz., the towns, and the reign of Free-trade, then the agricultural labourer was at last, post tot discrimina rerum, placed in circumstances that ought, secundum artem, to have made him drunk with happiness. At the same time, the capitalistic form of that industry reproduces this same division of labour in a still more monstrous shape; in the factory proper, by converting the workman into a living appendage of the machine; and everywhere outside the Factory, partly by the sporadic use of machinery and machine workers, * partly by re-establishing the division of labour on a fresh basis by the general introduction of the labour of women and children, and of cheap unskilled labour. ("Ch. Empl. MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 439 that be called compensation to the carpet-makers, thrown on the streets? We shall at last force the secret of profit making. The dye-works and bleach-works all came under the Factory Act of 1850 in I860; 3 lace and stocking manufactures in 1861. The sanitary officers, the industrial inquiry commissioners, the factory inspectors, all harp, over and over again, upon the necessity for those 500 cu- bic feet, and upon the impossibility of wringing them out of capital. Nathaniel Forster. 1, ch. How far it has been intended, in the English constitution and law, that this kind of unconditional property in land should be acquirable, and that a landlord, 'doing as he wills with his own,' should be able to treat the cultivators of the soil as aliens, whom he may expel from his territory, is a ques- tion which I do not pretend to discuss .... "If," dreamed Aristotle, the greatest thinker of antiquity, "if every tool, when summoned, or even of its own accord, could do the work that befits it, just as the creations of Daedalus moved of themselves, or the tripods of Hephaestos went of their own accord to their sacred work, if the weavers' shuttles were to weave of themselves, then there would be no need either of apprentices for the master workers, or of slaves for the lords." 1 And Antipatros, a Greek poet of the time of Cicero, hailed the invention of the water-wheel for grinding corn, an in- vention that is the elementary form of all machinery, as the giver of freedom to female slaves, and the bringer back of the golden age. Further: "By this in- crease the productive power of the machine will be augmented one-fifth. c, p. They are displaced twice. But after he has sold he becomes a buyer. This constant transformation of the wage-labourers into independent producers, who work for themselves instead of for capital, and enrich themselves instead of the capitalist gentry, reacts in its turn very perversely on the conditions of the 1. The expanded form of relative value, which is the expression of the value of one commodity in terms of all other commodities, endows those other commodities with the character of particu- lar equivalents differing in kind. These girls carried daily 10 tons up the slippery sides of the clay pits, from a depth of 30 feet, and then for a distance of 210 feet. 47, and 153. It is not the mere fertility of the soil, but the differen- tiation of the soil, the variety of its natural products, the changes 1 Diodorus, 1. 282 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION the rent of land, the Tories thundered with philanthropic in- dignation against the "nefarious practices" 1 of their foes. of Insp. The gipsy fun has vanished here, but according to all witnesses, the payment and treatment of the children is worse. It regulates all foundries, smithies, and metal manufactories, including ma- chine shops; furthermore glass-works, paper mills, gutta-percha and india- rubber works, tobacco manufactories, letter-press printing and book-binding works, and, lastly, all workshops in which more than 50 persons are em- ployed. Their earnings accordingly rose. In order, therefore, that a commodity may in practice act effectively as exchange-value, it must quit its bodily shape, must transform itself from mere imaginary into real gold, although to the commodity such tran- substantiation may be more difficult than to the Hegelian "con- cept," the transition from "necessity" to "freedom," or to a lobster the casting of his shell, or to Saint Jerome the putting off of the old Adam. (2.) Surplus-value and the value of labour-power vary in opposite directions. It was made a rule in the inquiry to select in each cate- gory the most healthy families, and those comparatively in the best circumstances. "This is falsifying a measure, not establishing a standard." He sees in this "false de- nomination" of the weight of gold, as in everything else, the falsifying hand of civilisation. At the same time portions of the original capitals disengage themselves and function as new independent capitals. In that place, where for more than 400 years laws had been made for the maximum, beyond which wages absolutely must not rise, Whitbread in 1796 proposed a legal minimum wage for agricultural labourers. dren than otherwise, believing that idleness is the parent of vice." On this the factory report of 31st Oct., 1848, says: The atmosphere of the flax mills, in which the children of these virtuous and tender parents work, is so loaded with dust and fibre from the raw material, that it is exceptionally unpleas- ant to stand even 10 minutes in the spinning rooms: for you are unable to do so without the most painful sensation, owing to the eyes, the ears, the nostrils, and mouth, being immediately filled by the clouds of flax dust from which there is no escape. This is evident, since their taking the form of commodities implies their differentiation into commodi- ties and money. 267.) 168 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION must first be fulfilled. First: The increasing concentration of the social means of production in the hands of individual capitalists is, other things remaining equal, limited by the degree of increase of social wealth. If the intensity of labour were to increase simultaneously and equally in every branch of industry, then the new and higher degree of intensity would become the normal degree for the so- ciety, and would therefore cease to be taken account of. as fat lubricates the motion of the muscles, feeds in want of victuals, fills up the uneven cavities and beautifies the body; so doth money in the state quicken its action, leeds irom abroad in time of dearth at home; evens accounts ... By a dexterous turn, therefore, Mr. Ricardo makes the value of labour depend on the quantity of labour re- quired to produce wages; or, to give him the benefit of his own language, he maintains, that the value of labour is to be estimated by the quantity of la- bour required to produce wages; by which he means the quantity of labour required to produce the money or commodities given to the labourer. Thus* the linen, for instance, first of all changes its commodity-form into its money-form. "In hac urbe," says Boxhorn (Inst. That we saw from the analysis of a commodity. They too are now severed from their connexion with the more pregnant moments of activity, and ossified into exclusive functions of spe- cially appointed labourers. The consumption of the labour-power, which was also the process of producing commodities, resulted in 20 lbs. ... It therefore varies with the value of these means or with the quantity of labour requisite for their production. Fact., 31st October, 1865," p. But it is only in so far as he ultimately contributes to this result, that he assists in rais- ing the general rate of surplus-value. THE WORKING-DAY 247 most active business months are from the beginning of October to the end of April. c, p. C M C. "An hundred houses and families have in some open field villages . According to the Census of 1861, the number of persons employed was 1,428, of whom 1,268 females from 5 years of age upwards. 1 The Act of 1850 changed the 15 hours' time from 6 a. _ ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION (a.) England from 1846-1866 No period of modern society is so favourable for the study of capitalist accumulation as the period of the last 20 years. to 6s. Insp Fact. 54.) THE WORKING-DAY 301 In the United States of North America, every independent movement of the workers was paralysed so long as slavery dis- figured a part of the Republic. Insp. In this inquiry we have neglected all effects of the process of circulation, effects which may produce very different degrees of efficiency in the same mass of capital. the former statute is repeated, but strength- ened with new clauses. iii. We are, however, apprehensive that the present Act (43rd of Elizabeth) will not warrant a prudential measure of this kind; but you are to learn that the rest of the freeholders of the county, and of the adjoining county of B, will very readily join in instructing their members to propose an Act to enable the parish to contract with a person to lock up and work the poor; and to declare that if any person shall refuse to be so locked up and worked, he shall be en- titled to no relief. It may be remembered that Schedule D (profits with the exception of those of farmers), in- cludes also the so-called, "professional" profits— i.e., the incomes of lawyers, doctors, &c; and the Schedules C. in all coun- tries, where industry is not restrained, the price of provisions must affect the price of labour. It is the value and not the mass of these necessaries that varies with the productiveness of labour. By degrees more is produced and more consumed, and consequently more products have to be converted into means of production. 6, 452, 83). The whole of the stolen clan- land she divided into 29 great sheep farms, each inhabited by a single family, for the most part imported English farm-servants. When we speak of capacity for labour, we do not abstract from the necessary means of subsistence. carefully watch the price of the raw material and the price of manufactured goods, and are thus enabled to form an accu- rate estimate of their master's profits." 1 The capitalist rightly knocks on the head such pretensions as gross errors as to the nature of wage-labour. It is then, the money-commodity, nei- ther merely ideal, as in its function of a measure of value, nor capable of being represented, as in its function of circulating medium. after it was woven." 1 In the Report of Inspectors of Factories for 30th April, 1864, we read as follows: "The trade is availing itself of this resource at present to an extent which is even discreditable. 31,210,612 yds. The United States are, speaking economically, still only a Colony of Europe. In these cases, the time that ought to be taken by the process is prescribed, just as it is in herring fishing. 39.) 4 "The Printworks' Act is admitted to be a failure, both with reier- ence to its educational and protective provisions." (Reports, &c ., for 31st October, 1862, p 52.) CAPITALIST PRODUCTION of exploitation still "free." 1 The Pharisees of "Political Economy" now proclaimed the discernment of the necessity of a legally fixed working-day as a characteristic new discovery of their "sci- ence." 2 It will be easily understood that after the factory magnates had resigned themselves and become reconciled to the inevitable, the power of resistance of capital gradually weakened, whilst at the same time the power of attack of the working-class grew with the number of its allies in the classes of society not immediately interested in the question. c, pp. On the level plain, simple mounds look like hills; and the imbecile flatness of the present bourgeoisie is to be measured by the altitude of its great intellects. If now circumstances allow of this price being raised to £3, or compel it to be reduced to £1, then although £1 and £3 may be too small or too great properly to express the magnitude of the wheat's value, neverthe- 1 "Owing to the fact that money, when serving as the standard oi price, appears under the same reckoning names as do the prices of commodities, and that therefore the sum of £3 17s. m. 67.) 524 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION only one variable factor, viz., the productiveness of labour; (2), and this error vitiates his analysis much more than (1), he has not, any more than have the other economists, investi- gated surplus-value as such, i.e., independently of its particular forms, such as profit, rent, &c. What is it that makes such men as Roscher account for the origin of surplus-value, by a mere rechauffe of the more or less plau- sible excuses by the capitalist, for his appropriation of surplus-value? c, p. . I need scarcely add that many of these dwellings are dark, damp, dirty, stinking holes, utterly unfit for human habitations; they are the centres from which disease and death are distributed amongst those in better circumstances, who have allowed them thus to fester in our midst." 1 Bristol takes the third place after London in the misery of its dwellings. 486.) MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OF COMMODITIES 131 Gold and silver thus become of themselves social expressions for superfluity or wealth. Leonce de Lavergne has hastened to repeat this on the other side of the Channel. Hence, the application of machinery to the production of surplus-value implies a contradiction which is immanent in it, since of the two factors of the surplus-value created by a given amount of capital, one, the rate of surplus-value, cannot be increased, except by diminishing the other, the number of workmen. The value of the additional capital, therefore, remaining the same or even diminishing, accelerated accumulation still takes place. Cruelty was, of course, the con- sequence. A contract for opium was given to a certain Sullivan at the moment of his departure on an official mission to a part of India far removed from the opium district. He now gets obstinate. We may see a bit of flesh meat sometimes, but very seldom. (See Workman's Advocate, January 13th, 1866.) The formation since the close of 1865 of a Trades' Union among the agricultural labourers at first in Scotland is a historic event. MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 493 of the children of the working-class, that this report lay unno- ticed for 20 years, during which the children, 'bred up without the remotest sign of comprehension as to what is meant by the term morals, who had neither knowledge, nor religion, nor natu- ral affection,' were allowed to become the parents of the present generation." 1 The social conditions having undergone a change, Parlia- ment could not venture to shelve the demands of the Commission of 1862, as it had done those of the Commission of 1840. Sir F. 455, 456. Hence trade is advantageously contrasted with gambling, which consists in a mere exchange of money for money." (Th. Corbet, "An Inquiry into the Causes and Modes of the Wealth of Individuals; or the Principles of Trade and Spec- ulation Explained." London, 1841, p. There are two circumstances that finally turn the scale: first, the constantly recurring experience that capital, so soon as it finds itself subject to legal control at one point, compen- sates itself all the more recklessly at other points; 2 secondly, the cry of the capitalists for equality in the conditions of compe- tition, i.e., for equal restrain on all exploitation of labour. . They are, therefore, not determined by the variations of the absolute number of the work- ing population, but by the varying proportions in which the working-class is divided into active and reserve army, by the increase or diminution in the relative amount of the surplus- population, by the extent to which it is now absorbed, now set free. CAPITALIST PRODUCTION It is true that in some cases, as we saw from instances of English worsted and silk factories, an extraordinary extension of the factory system may, at a certain stage of its develop- ment, be accompanied not only by a relative, but by an absolute decrease in the number of operatives employed. For example — "Once admit that A tails, because B, with which, it is exchanged, rises, while no less labour is bestowed in the mean-' time on A, and your general principle of value falls to the ground.... The manufacturers again found that they were short of hands. IV. x Finally, some one may ask why gold is capable of being replaced by tokens that have no value? . But mean- while the fiasco of the Chartist party whose leaders were imprisoned, and whose organisation was dismembered, had shaken the confidence of the English working-class in its own strength. 3d. 158, 159. of Fact.," 31st October, 1849, p. Three at the least out of every seven horses used on tillage land during the year can be dispensed with by using steam-power, at an expense not greater than that which, the horses dispensed with, would cost during the 3 or 4 months in which alone they can be used effectively. Insp. ACCUMULATION OF CAPITAL 565 ourselves either about the new forms that capital assumes while in the sphere of circulation, or about the concrete conditions of re- production hidden under these forms. Rep., 1864," pp. 17. 5 "With respect to the loss of trade by non-completion of shipping or- ders in time, I remember that this was the pet argument of the factory masters in 1832 and 1833. The public debt becomes one of the most powerful levers of primitive accumulation. Thus, in 1835, the total number of operatives in the cotton, woollen, worsted, flax, and silk facto- ries of the United Kingdom was only 354,684; while in 1861 the number of the power-loom weavers alone (of both sexes and of all ages, from eight years upwards), amounted to 230,654. But this much is clear at the first glance: that this system annulled the whole Factory Act, not only in the spirit, but in the letter. He says: "It may, perhaps, be worthy the attention of the public to consider, whether any manufacture, which, in order to be carried on successfully, requires that cottages and workhouses should be ransacked for poor children; that they should be em- ployed by turns during the greater part of the night and robbed of that rest which, though indispensable to all, is most required by the young; and that numbers of both sexes, of different ages and dispositions, should be collected together in such a manner that the contagion of example cannot but lead to profligacy and de- bauchery; will add to the sum of individual or national felicity?" 2 1 Mirabeau, I. Ten hours subtracted from twelve, leave two, and it is not easy to see, how, under the given conditions, the surplus-la- bour can possibly be prolonged beyond two hours. The advance made by the 18th century shows itself in this, that the law itself becomes now the instrument of the theft of the people's land, although the large farmers make use of their little independent methods as well. c. Bullion, then, may be reckoned to be of higher value where the smaller weight will purchase the greater quantity of the product or manufacture of the countrey," &c. From the analysis of the statistics of pauper- ism, two points are to be taken. Its immediate effect on the workpeople is like that of all machinery, which, since the rise of modern industry, has seized upon new branches of trade. c, pp. 74-76. 3 I. Erster Band Berlin, 1858, p. he will be able to clothe his workmen by means of a smaller proportion of the entire return ... In this process the labour-power is it- self consumed by the capitalist while the means of production are consumed by the labour-power in the exercise of its function, la- bour. Indeed ... Insp. The family "consists of father, mother, and four children." Of these 6 persons "four may be usefully employed the whole year through." It is assumed that "there is no sick per- son nor one incapable of work, among them," nor are there "ex- penses for religious, moral, and intellectual purposes, except a very small sum for church sittings," nor "contributions to savings banks or benefit societies," nor "expenses due to luxury or the re- sult of improvidence." The father and eldest son, however, allow themselves "the use of tobacco," and on Sundays "go to the cabaret," for which a whole 86 centimes a week are reckoned. Vanderlint, 1. Gradually it became inevitably the recep- tacle of the metallic hoard of the country, and the centre of grav- ity of all commercial credit. A range of the working-day from 12 to 14 or 15 hours, night-labour, irregular meal-times, meals for the most part taken in the very workrooms that are pestilent with phospho- rus. Finally, as is always the case with machinery when not organised into a system, and when it can also be used in dwarfish proportions, handicraftsmen and do- mestic workers, along with their families, or with a little extra labour from without, make use of their own sewing-machines. 1 Although, therefore, the English land, after the Norman conquest, was distributed in gigantic baronies, one of which often included some 900 of the old Anglo-Saxon lordships, it was bestrewn with small peasant properties, only here and there interspersed with great seignorial domains. If the thing is useless, so is the labour contained in it; the labour does not count as labour, and therefore creates no value. A glance at table 1 As Ireland is regarded as the promised land of the "principle of popu- lation," Th. Sadler, before the publication of his work on population, issued his famous book, "Ireland, its Evils and their Remedies." 2nd edition, London, 1829. He leaves this and all such like subterfuges and juggling tricks to the professors of Political Economy, who are paid for it. 2 I. Often 1,000,000 grammes of quartz barely yield 1-3 and very seldom 30-60 grammes of gold. compared with thirty or forty years ago. The old capital is reproduced in a more productive form, apart from the constant detail improvements in the instruments of la- bour already in use. It is acknowl- edged by even the writers in defence of enclosures that these di- minished villages increase the monopolies of farms, raise the prices of provisions, and produce depopulation . In order to reward the manufacturers for having, in the most barefaced way, ignored all the Acts as to children's labour passed during the last twenty-two years, the pill was yet further gilded for them. By maturing the material conditions, and the combination on a social scale of the processes of production, it matures the contradictions and antagonisms of the capitalist form of production, and thereby provides, along with the elements for the formation of a new society, the forces for exploding the old one. The more intense national labour, therefore, as compared with the less intense, produces in the same time more value, which expresses itself in more money. In the first case, one coat is worth as much as two coats were before; in the second case, two coats are only worth as much as one was before, although in both cases one coat renders the same service as before, and the useful labour embodied in it remains of the same quality. No matter, then, what we may think of the parts played by the different classes of people themselves in this soci- ety, the social relations between individuals in the performance of their labour, appear at all events as their own mutual personal relations, and are not disguised under the shape of social relations between the products of labour. 68, gave the regulation of the wages of silk-weavers to the justices of the peace; still, in 1706, it required two judgments of the higher courts to decide, whether the mandates of justices of the peace as to wages held good also for non-agricultural labourers; still, in 1799, an act of 1 From a clause of Statute 2 James I., c. * Those small and extremely ancient Indian communities, some of which have continued down to this day, are based on possession in common of the land, on the blending of agriculture and handi- crafts, and on an unalterable division of labour, which serves, whenever a new community is started, as a plan and scheme ready cut and dried. . 1861.) Sir John Gordon stated before the committee of 1855, that "in consequence of these adulterations, the poor man, who lives on two pounds of bread a day, does not now get one fourth part of nourishing matter, let alone the deleterious effects on his health." Tremenheere states (1. embrace a diversity of occupa- tions, the customs in which differ greatly, and the use of mechanical power to give motion to machinery is no longer one of the elements necessary, as formerly, to constitute, in legal phrase, a 'Factory.'" (Reports, &c, for 31st October, 1864, p. In 1864, however, they were brought under the Act, and within sixteen months every "im- possibility" had vanished. . He can, under the pretence of paying "the nor- mal price of labour," abnormally lengthen the working-day with- out any corresponding compensation to the labourer. 9.) "The work which obtains the scanty pittance of food, is, for the most part, excessively prolonged." ("Public Health, Sixth Report," 1864, p. 52, 53.) I quote this little work because it is a very sink of all long-ago- rotten, apologetic commonplaces. . With the productive power of labour increases the mass of the products, in which a certain value, and, therefore, a surplus- value of a given magnitude, is embodied. By carrying on all the different processes at once, whioh an individual must have executed separately, it becomes possible to produce a multitude of pins completely finished in the DIVISION OF LABOUR AND MANUFACTURE 345 co-operative form of the process as a whole; but Manufacture not only finds the conditions for co-operation ready to hand, it also, to some extent, creates them by the sub-division of handicraft labour. Coats and linen, however, are not merely values, but values of definite magnitude, and according to our assumption, the coat is worth twice as much as the ten yards of linen. But the connexion between the two acts exists for me alone. Simple co-operation is always the prevailing form, in those branches of production in which capital operates on a large scale, and division of labour and machinery play but a subordi- nate part. or 7s. Mr. Wollarton, the clergyman 484 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION has shown us in detail, the germ of the education of the future, an education that will, in the case of every child over a given age, combine productive labour with instruction and gymnastics, not only as one of the methods of adding to the efficiency of production, but as the only method of producing fully developed human beings. rations d'hommes [how generous of Mr. Molinari!]: mais ne vaudrait-il pas mieux que ni les uns ni les autres perissent?" (Molinari, 1. London, 1767, pp. Thus, e.g., J. One law holds in Yorkshire, another in Lancashire; one law in one parish of Lancashire, another in its immediate neighbourhood. A large number of those employed by the undersellers are foreigners and youths, who are obliged to accept almost any wages they can obtain." 1 This jeremiad is also interesting because it shows, how the appearance only of the relations of production mirrors itself in the brain of the capitalist. Only a man with such atrocious want of the critical faculty and such spurious erudition deserved, in spite of his Protectionist heresy, to become the secret source of the harmonious wisdom of a Bastiat, and of all the other Free-trade optimists of to-day. certainly tend pie* maturely to exhaust the working power of the men." (I. that em- ploys 100 labourers a day with a rate of surplus-value of 200% or with a working-day of 18 hours, produces only a mass of surplus-val- ue of 600s. 89. The Italians, on the other hand, were always decreasing in number, destroyed as they were by poverty, taxes, and military service. It is now no longer the labourer that em- ploys the means of production, but the means of production that em- ploy the labourer. It cannot be denied that John Stuart Mill owes his, at all events, "remarkable" authority almost entirely to such quid-pro-quos. Blanqui: "Cours d'Econ Industrielle" Recueilli par A Blaise Paris, 1838-39, p 79.) Since Blanqui wrote this, the vari- ous independent labourers have, to some extent, been united in factories. Only by suppressing the capitalist form of production could the length of the working-day be reduced to the necessary labour-time. 7-j-d. The only requisite is that there be a sufficient supply to absorb the labour expended in the process of production. 2 Hence, we see that behind all attempts to represent th& circulation of commodities as a source of surplus-value, there lurks a quid pro quo, a mixing up of use-value and exchange-value. If, therefore, commodity production, or one of its associated processes, is to be judged according to its own economic laws, we must consider each act of exchange by itself, apart from any connex- ion with the act of exchange preceding it and that following it. This form, it is plain, occurs practically only in the first beginning, when the products of labour are converted into commodities by accidental and occasional exchanges. Comm., Fourth Rep.," 1865, pp. c, p. It produces also the premature exhaustion and death of this labour-power itself. These deal especially with the branches of in- dustry in which the Factory Acts had not, up to 1862, been introduced, in fact are not yet introduced. 127, n. The economic discoverers of this chemical element, who by-the- by lay special claim to critical acumen, find however that the use-value of objects belongs to them independently of their mate- rial properties, while their value, on the other hand, forms a part of them as objects. But the wider scope that piece- wage gives to individuality, tends to develop on the one hand that individuality, and with it the sense of liberty, independence, and self-control of the labourers, on the other, their competition one with another. For example, if the necessary la- bour==5 hours and the surplus-labour=5 hours, the degree of exploitation is 100%. Thus this fine lady appropriated 794,000 acres of land that had from time immemorial belonged to the clan. After holding out for some time, the self-elected captains of industry had to make up their minds to short time, with reduced wages in some places, and in others without. Nevertheless the analysis of every possible case is easy in view of the results given in I., II., and III. And this subordination is no mere momentary act. 2 So far no chemist has ever discovered exchange-value either in a pearl or a diamond. From the standpoint of modern mechanical industry, this necessity stands forth as a characteristic and costly disadvantage, and one that is immanent in the principle of manufacture. Fact, for 31st October, 1856," p. But— but — 1 1. 1 To the out-cry as to the physical and mental degradation, the pre- mature death, the torture of over-work, it answers: Ought these to trouble us since they increase our profits? '231.) THE GENERAL FORM ULA FOR CAPITAL 151 does in M— C— M. How long is it since economy dis- carded the physiocratic illusion, that rents grow out of the soil and not out of society? 2 F. With a general fall in the prices of commodities, the quan- tity of the circulating medium will remain constant, provided the number of commodities increase proportionally to their fall in price, or provided the velocity of currency decrease in the same proportion. Much straw-plaiting. Cotton, which required less careful preparation for its treatment by machinery, derived the benefit of the experience gained on wool, just as after- wards the manipulation of wool by machinery was developed on the lines of cotton-spinning and weaving by machinery.lt was only during the 10 years im- mediately preceding 1866, that isolated details of the wool manufacture, such as wool-combing, were incorporated in the factory system. 'Johnson. Exchange-value and use-value, being intrinsically incommensurable magnitudes, the expressions "value of labour," "price of labour," do not seem more irrational than the expressions "value of cotton," "price of cotton." Moreover, the labourer is paid after he has given his labour. If we start from the notion that all commodities together form one single commodity, of which each is but an aliquot part, we get the following beautiful result: The total commodity=x cwt. The same blind eagerness for plun- der that in the one case exhausted the soil, had, in the other, torn up by the roots the living force of the nation. The compulsory regulation of the working-day as regards its length, pauses, beginning and end, the system of relays of children, the exclusion of all children under a certain age, &c, necessitate on the one hand more machinery 4 and the sub- 1 I. And, in its normal form, the circulation of commodities demands the exchange of equivalents. But, on the other hand, as soon as (in the colonies, e.g.) adverse circumstances pre- vent the creation of an industrial reserve army and, with it, the absolute dependence of the working-class upon the capitalist class, capital, along with its commonplace Sancho Panza, rebels against the "sacred" law of supply and demand, and tries to check its inconvenient action by forcible means and State interference. L'un rame pendant que l'autre tient le gouvernail, et qu'un troi- sieme jette le filet ou harponne le poisson, et la peche a un succes impossible sans ce concours." (Destutt de Tracy, 1. . per acre to the clansmen, who for centuries had shed their blood for her family. Hence a working-day of more intense labour is embodied in more products than is one of less intense labour, the length of each day being the same. In such cases, a week's expe- rience is enough to determine the proportion between the num- bers of the hands necessary for the various functions. Fact. Now deer are supplanting sheep; and these are once more dispossessing the small tenants, who will necessarily be driven down upon still coarser land and to more grinding penury. It reduces the sound sleep needed for the resto- ration, reparation, refreshment of the bodily powers to just so many hours of torpor as the revival of an organism, absolutely exhausted, renders essential. m. That portion of the working-day, then, during which this reproduction takes place, 1 In the same way that the English use the terms "rate of profit," "rate of interest." We shall see, in Book III., that the rate of profit is no mystery, so soon as we know the laws of surplus-value. For instance, if a dozen masons place themselves in a row, so as to pass stones from the foot of a ladder to its summit, each of them does the same thing; nevertheless, their separate acts form connected parts of one total operation; they are particular phases, which must be gone through by each stone; and the stones are thus carried up quicker by the 24 hands of the row of men than they could be if each man went separately up and down the ladder with his burden. In addition to these two principal classes, there is a numerically unimportant class of persons, whose occupation it is to look after the whole of the ma- chinery and repair it from time to time; such as engineers, mechan- ics, joiners, &c. In his "The State of the Poor, or an History of the Labouring Classes in England, &c," Sir F. If, say in consequence of the exhaustion of flax-growing soil, the labour-time necessary for the production of the linen be doubled, the value of the linen will also be doubled. Nothing that can be advanced now on this subject, could have the force that it had then, before steam had halved all distances and established new regulations for transit. For instance, if a spinning machine lasts for 10 years, it is plain that during that working period its total value is gradually transferred to the product of the 10 years. II., pp. of Fact.," 30th April, 1860, p. It will soon be learnt from experience that tinkering of this sort is of no use. II va du blanc au noir, II condamne au matin ses sentiments du soir. I, p. But his labour is not represented both by the value of the commodity, and by a surplus over that value, not by a price of 10 that is also a price of 11, not by a value that is greater than itself. 117) the English text has been altered in conformity with the 4th German edi- tion. Manufacture produced the machinery, by means of which Modern Industry abolished the handicraft and manufacturing systems in those spheres of production that it first seized upon. In the second case, it is not the increased rate either of the absolute, or of the proportional, increase in labour-power, or labouring population, reduce the master's gains below the average profit oi' capital, he will cease to employ them, or he will only employ them on condition of submission to a reduction of wages." (John Wade, 1. sought to tide over the difficulty, by allowing the Bank of England to issue notes against silver bullion, on condition that the reserve of silver should never exceed more than one-fourth of the reserve of gold. The devil himself does his servants inestimable service.... c, p. But this is true only so far as he himself is concerned. To wear fine cloaks, golden chains, rings, to wipe his mouth, to be deemed and taken for a worthy, pious man... . c, p. 1 On the contrary, a fall in the rate of surplus-value leaves unaltered the mass of the surplus-value produced, if the amount of the variable capital, or number of the labourers employed, increases in the same pro- portion. I have five children in all. In both these cases, the spinner puts the same quantity of labour into a pound of cotton, and therefore adds as much value, as he did before the change in the value: he also produces a given weight of yarn in the same time as he did before. 693, p. • 8.6 Potatoes, . 2 James Anderson remarks in his polemic against Adam Smith: "It deserves, likewise, to be remarked, that although the apparent price of la- bour is usually lower in poor countries, where the produce of the soil, and grain in general, is cheap; yet it is in fact for the most part really higher than in other countries For it is not the wages that is given to the labourer per day that constitutes the real price of labour, although it is its apparent price. The metal that for the time being was estimated below its value, was withdrawn from circulation, melted and exported. of yarn. 2 From the motley crowd of labourers of all callings, ages, sexes, that press on us more busily than the souls of the slain on Ulysses, on whom — without referring to the Blue books under their arms — we see at a glance the mark of over-work, let us take two more figures whose striking contrast proves that before capital all men are alike— a milliner and a blacksmith. 32. If they send it out, which is not common, except as supplying chandlers' shops, they usually employ other hands for that purpose. The great production of surplus-value in these branches of labour, and the progressive cheapening of their articles, were and are chiefly due to the minimum wages paid, no more than requisite for a miserable vegetation, and to the extension of work- ing-time up to the maximum endurable by the human organism. The following table shows the dis- tribution of the profits (with the exception of those of farmers) for the years 1864 and 1865: — Table E SCHEDULE D. for 12 hours' labour; the price of his labour would be equal to the price of his product. 2 "No child under 12 years of age shall be employed in any manufactur- ing establishment more than 10 hours in one day." General Statutes of Mas- sachusetts, 63, ch. Those where a very large number of labourers work, each separately and on his own account, are hardly considered; they are placed at an infinite distance from the others. What really confronted them as capital, was the sum of £1,500, afterwards laid out in machinery. Usury is a great huge monster, like a were-wolf, who lays waste all, more than any Ca- cus, Gerion or Antus. Scullery: 8 ft. 130, Note.) John St. Mill, on the con- trary, accepts on the one hand Ricardo's theory of profit, and annexes on the other hand Senior's "remuneration of abstinence." He is as much at home in absurd contradictions, as he feels at sea in the Hegelian contradiction, the source of all dialectic. 2 "Labour creates capital before capital employs labour." E. 3, 1873, p. 27, 28.) The fellows in fact were hankering after a rise in wages. An example of the waggish way in 1 1. It consequently makes no alteration whatever in the relation between surplus-value and value of labour-power. He gen- erally arranges with the latter for piece-work, and his income, which on the average is not very much above that of an ordinary agricultural labourer, 2 depends almost entirely upon the dex- terity with which he manages to extract within the shortest time the greatest possible amount of labour from his gang. In the rear of that industry, the traditional form of manufacture, of handicraft, and of domestic industry, is entirely revolutionised; manufactures are constantly passing into the factory system, and handicrafts into manufactures; and lastly, the spheres of handicraft and of the domestic industries become, in a, comparatively speaking, wonderfully short time, dens of misery in which capitalistic exploitation obtains free play for the wildest excesses. I suppose he would be found fault with if he were discovered reading; he is there to mind his business, he has a duty to perform, and he has to attend to it in the first place, and I do not think it would be allowed down the pit." (ns. 3 1. CM vr t^ OS wiO ifliO iO t^ t^ CM o oo oo V}< o CO t^ CO 00 CO © 00 CM CM <vr-< »— , oo o LO CO OS OS iO vr o lO CO CO o CO to •*H c^ d 00 00 l> lO CM OS 00* TH CO oo CM CO 00 CO m o 8 00 OS § -r-lrt *3- <* CO* vr 1 g o CM CO o" 55 00 CM CM CM t-* CM OS o OS t^ CM CM o- OS s 00 o COO O0 •* OS ■^H t— OS d oo oo 00 VO CO CM CO CM CM CM OS CM CO CO o o. c, p. III.," p. Ainsi faMtes-vous, quand vous vous emparez du sol.... Comm., II. In spite of the variety of his work, he knows that his labour, whatever its form, is but the activity of one and the same Robinson, and consequently, that it consists of nothing but different modes of human labour. v 35.) 2 "Rep. Evi- dence, 23rd July, 1866." This Report is the work of a Parliamen- tary Committee selected from members of the House of Commons, and authorised to summon and examine witnesses. Hence, apart from the radical changes introduced in the construction of sailing vessels, the means of communication and transport became grad- ually adapted to the modes of production of mechanical indus- try, by the creation of a system of river steamers, railways, ocean steamers, and telegraphs. For instance, 40 yards of linen are worth — what? In Manufacture, on the contrary, the turning out of a given quantum of product in a given time is a technical law of the process of production itself. Ordered by the House of Commons to be printed, 0th August, 1859, pp. But the opposition is not nearly so pleasant, and is far more capable of crystallisation. When we throw both into the scales, we see in reality, that as weight they are both the same, and that, therefore, when taken in proper proportions, they have the same weight. Sweet commerce! The English East India Company, as is well known, obtained, besides the political rule in India, the exclusive monopoly of the tea-trade, as well as of the Chinese trade in general, and of the transport of goods to and from Europe. E or=&c. The Elementary form of value considered as a whole The elementary form of value of a commodity is contained in the equation, expressing its value-relation to another com- modity of a different kind, or in its exchange-relation to the same. His successors, Boultonand Watt, sent to the exhi- bition of 1851 steam-engines of colossal size for ocean steamers. Macaulay, who has falsified English history in the interests of the Whigs and the bourgeoisie, declares as follows: "The practice of setting children prematurely to work ... As soon as the exploitation of the women and children takes place on a larger scale it be- comes in turn a new means of making a surplus-population of the male agricultural labourer and of keeping down his wage. - p- i. The hastening of this revolution by the application of the Factory Acts to those Industries The cheapening of labour-power, by sheer abuse of the labour of women and children, by sheer robbery of every nor- mal condition requisite for working and living, and by the sheer brutality of over-work and night-work, meets at last with natural obstacles that cannot be overstepped. The fathers of the present working-class were chastised for their en- forced transformation into vagabonds and paupers. Therefore, though a machine cost as much as the labour-power displaced by it costs, yet the labour materialised in it is even then much less than the living labour it replaces. It was attested by numerous witnesses in various grades of life, that to these insanitary in- fluences, and many more, the underfed peasant was nightly exposed, and of the result, a debilitated and scrofulous people, there was no w T ant of evidence ....The statements of the relieving officers of Carmarthenshire and Cardigan- shire show in a striking way the same state of things. The only thing, that here and there causes a change, besides new raw 1 1. c, pp. x The raw material, &c, is supplied by mechanical industry, the mass of cheap human material (taillable a merci et miseri- corde) is composed of the individuals "liberated" by mechanical industry and improved agriculture. On the one hand, the imme- diate effect of machinery is to increase the supply of raw mate- rial in the same way, for example, as the cotton gin augmented the production of cotton. At the same rate, then, as the conversion of products into commodities is being accom- plished, so also is the conversion of one special commodity into money. The average price of labour is found, when the average daily value of the labour-power is divided by the average number of hours in the working-day. The general form of relative value has resumed its original shape of simple or isolated relative value. of coffee =20 yards of linen. We had, therefore, to assume that this occurs during the transition from handicraft to capitalistic industry. "When the savage," says Senior, "makes bows, he exercises an industry, but he does not practise abstinence." This explains how and why, in the earlier states of society, the implements of labour were fabricated without abstinence on the part of the capi- talist. about 1739 or 1740. Hence all the inconveniences that our E.G. Wakefield pictures so doughtily, so eloquently, so pathetically. This is an essential element of the so-called primitive accumulation. He therefore buys it before he pays for it. Employ- ment by him is, therefore, much more lucrative and more cer- tain for the labouring families, than employment by the individ- ual farmer, who only employs children occasionally. 812,589 yds. And this is the point relied on by our apologists! The contradictions and antagonisms insep- arable from the capitalist employment of machinery, do not exist, they say, since they do not arise out of machinery, as such, but out of its capitalist employment! Since therefore machinery, con- sidered alone, shortens the hours of labour, but, when in the serv- ice of capital, lengthens them; since in itself it lightens labour, but when employed by capital, heightens the intensity of labour; since in itself it is a victory of man over the forces of Nature, but in the hands of capital, makes man the slave of those forces; since in itself it increases the wealth of the producers, but in the hands of capital, makes them paupers — for all these reasons and others besides, says the bourgeois economist without more ado, it is clear as noon-day that all these contradictions are a mere semblance of the reality, and that, as a matter of fact, they have neither an actual nor a theoretical existence. (20 yards of linen =1 coat or =10 lbs. This, however, can make no difference with regard to the quantitative relation of surplus-labour to necessary labour. On the other hand, the industrial bourgeoisie foamed with sullen rage at the denunciations of the factory system by the landed aristocracy, at the pretended sympathy with the woes of the factory operatives, of those utterly corrupt, heartless, and genteel loafers, and at their "diplomatic zeal" for factory legis- lation. Dr. Simon, medical officer to the Privy Council, chose for this work the above-mentioned Dr. Smith. THE LABOUR-PROCESS 185 capitalist to whom his labour belongs; the capitalist taking good care that the work is done in a proper manner, and that the means of production are used with intelligence, so that there is no unnecessary waste of raw material, and no wear and tear of the implements beyond what is necessarily caused by the work. "There is much in the evi- dence that shows that the parents of the children would, in many instances, be glad to be aided by the requirements of a legal obligation, to resist the pres- sure and the temptations to which they are often subject. Apart from all other circumstances, this event alone was sufficient to give a great impulse to the turning of Irish arable into pasture land, to the concentration of farms, and to the eviction of small cultivators. c, p. Here, then, little or no alteration had been en- forced, by authority, in the conditions painted by Engels. 2 What were the consequences for the Irish labourers left behind and freed from the surplus-population? Od., which is the variable capital advanced: and we see that a new value of £3 10s. . During the second half of the 14th century he is replaced by a farmer, whom the landlord provides with seed, cattle and implements. THE LABOUR-PROCESS 181 If we examine the whole process from the point of view of its result, the product, it is plain that both the instruments and the subject of labour, are means of production, 1 and that the la- bour itself is productive labour. 77 sq. 3 Turgot in his "Reflexions sur la Formation et la Distribution des Richesses" (1766) brings well into prominence the importance of domesti- cated animals to early civilisation. This is one, though not the chief, cause of a phenomenon which, at first, puzzles the student of English history. As a matter of fact, the methods of primitive accumulation are anything but idyllic. Not even are the bones of saints, and still less are more delicate res sacrosan- cta?, extra commercium hominum able to withstand this alchemy. 810.) 2 Compare W. But in this respect the material fac- tors of the labour-process do not all behave alike. (n. From their fifth year and often earlier, until their twelfth or fifteenth year, the children work in these schools; during the first year the very young ones work from four to eight hours, and later on, from six in the morning till eight and ten o'clock at night. Now, for one example out of many. 54.) The author, an uncommonly self-satis- fied wiseacre, is right in his confusion and therefore in his contention, to this extent only, that neither Ricardo nor any other economist, before or since him, has accurately distinguished the two aspects of labour, and still less, therefore, the part played by it under each of these aspects in the for- mation of value. to 7 p. m. A use-value, or useful article, therefore, has value only because human labour in the abstract has been embodied or materialised in it. Economy does, it is, in any case, "very remarkable" that he should make Mr. John Stuart Mill the first propounder of a theory which was first published by James Anderson in A. 2 He (Busiris) divided them all into special castes ... Unluckily for him, weavers are not few and far be- tween. This is so because the value of the labour-power — sold for a definite length of time, say a day, a week, etc. I worked all night last night, till 6 o'clock this morning. In it he assumes the price of wheat to be 8s. It is not merely that an accelerated accumulation of total capital, accelerated in a constantly growing progression, is needed to absorb an additional number of labourers, or even, on account of the constant metamorphosis of old capital, to keep employed those already functioning. -Col. The principle which it pursued, of resolving each process into its constituent movements, with- out any regard to their possible execution by the hand of man, created the new modern science of technology. But the greater this reserve army in proportion to the active labour- army, the greater is the mass of a consolidated surplus-popula- tion, whose misery is in inverse ratio to its torment of labour. You preach to me constantly the gospel of "saving" and "abstinence." Good! I will, like a sensible saving owner, husband my sole wealth, labour-power, and abstain from all foolish waste of it. They have in their minds the means of subsistence of the liberated workpeople. 3,819,440 7,207,113 Buckwheat, cwts 1,054 19,571 Maize, cwts 5,473,161 11,694,818 Bere or Bigg (a sort of Barley), cwts 2,039 7,675 Peas, cwts 811,620 1,024,722 Beans, , 1,822,972 2,037,137 Total exports 34,365,«01 74,083,351 1 In an appeal made in July, 1866, to the Trade Societies of England, by the shoemakers of Leicester, who had been thrown on the streets by a lock-out, it is stated: "Twenty years ago the Leicester shoe trade was revolutionised by the introduction of riveting in the place of stitching. 4 "Rep. In the same way, also, the special, concrete, useful kind of labour embodied in each particular equivalent, is pre- sented only as a particular kind of labour, and therefore not as an exhaustive representative of human labour generally. The frequent repetition of the displacement of the same coins reflects not only the series of metamorphoses that a single commodity has gone through, but also the intertwining of the innumerable metamorphoses in the world of commodities in general. Secondly, the time occupied in the labour of production must not exceed the time really nec- essary under the given social conditions of the case. 212, 213, 328. 165, 166.) THE GENERAL FORMULA FOR CAPITAL 153 is what he aims at. m., and all after that is over-time." 1 (Does this Mr. Smith take no meals himself during 10y hours?) "We (this same Smith) sel- dom leave off working before 6 p. Threatened in thier holiest interest, 1 "Rept. Some of these workmen were independent handi- craftsmen of various trades, others were grouped together in manu- factures, in which, as before-mentioned, division of labour was strictly carried out. The labour of women and children was, therefore, the first thing sought for by capital- ists who used machinery. 4) very truly remarks: the value produced by an oil mill, after de- duction of all costs, is something new, something quite different from the labour by which the oil mill itself was erected." (1. The afternoon shift must therefore consist of other children than those employed in the morning. 202.) On the oth- er hand, "the labour question in some agricultural districts, particularly the arable, is becoming so serious in consequence of emigration, and the facili- ty afforded by railways for getting to large towns that I (the "I" is the steward of a great lord) think the services of children are most indispensable." (1. 60 working-hours are left, 10 y for each of the first 5 days, 1-j for the last. 206 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION labour-process into which it enters as a means of production, but by that out of which it has issued as a product. He again does not know that this extra pay in- cludes unpaid labour, just as well as does the price of the custom- ary hour of labour. The first form, A, furnishes such equations as the following: — 1 coat =20 yards of linen, 10 lbs. a-week, 14 feet 6 inches long, 7 feet broad, kitchen, 6 feet high, the bedroom without window, fire-place, door, or opening, except into the lobby; no garden. M — C — M' is therefore in reality the general formula of cap- ital as it appears prima facie within the sphere of circulation. Its value, like that of all other commod- ities, is determined by the working-time necessary to its pro- duction. They are then engaged all day long, up to 4, 5, 6, and as late as 7 o'clock in the evening carrying out bread, or sometimes in the afternoon in the bakehouse again, assisting in the biscuit- baking. 114. COTTON Yam Cloth FLAX & HEMP Yarn Cloth SILK Yarn Cloth WOOL Yarn Cloth 5,927,831 16,753,369 493,449 2,802,789 77,789 776,975 5.733,828 6,634,026 23,454,810 951,426 4,107,396 195,380 1,130,398 1,484,544 8,377,183 9,870,875 42,141,505 1,801,272 4,804,803 918,342 1,587,303 3,843,450 12,156,998 10,351,04 46,903,796 2,505,497 9,155,318 768,067 1,409,221 5,424,017 20,102.259 See the Blue books "Statistical Abstract of the United Kingdom," Nos. 1 "It is a very notable thing, too, that where long hours are the rule, small wages are also so." ("Report of Insp. In order that he may be able to do this, he must have it at his disposal, must be the untrammelled owner of his capacity for labour, i.e., of his person. the source whereby the competition was carried on, and continues so to this day.... 6. Take the working-day at 12 hours and the value created by it at 6 shillings, of which one half re- places the value of the labour-power, the other forms the surplus- value. 2 And this was one of the best Appalling tragedies," &c, a whole list of fresh railway catastrophes. Whenever there is a general and extensive dis- turbance of this mechanism, no matter what its cause, money becomes suddenly and immediately transformed, from its merely ideal shape of money of account, into hard cash. He develops his slumbering powers and compels them to act in obedience to his sway, We are not now dealing 178 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION with those primitive instinctive forms of labour that remind us of the mere animal. constitute probably four-fifths of the workers in the factories." "Report of Insp of Fact., 30th April, 1858." 4 "The productive power of his spinning-machine is accurately meas- ured, and the rate of pay for work done with it decreases with, though not 558 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION purely nominal, leads to constant battles between capitalist and labour. Econ.," Lond., 1833, p. . Econ.," with his preface to the first edition, in which preface he announces himself as the Adam Smith of his day— we do not know whether to admire more the simplicity of the man, or that of the public, who took him, in good faith, for the Adam Smith he announced himself to be, although he bears about as much resemblance to Adam Smith as say General Williams, of Kars, to the Duke of Wellington. The science of others is as much annexed by capital as the labour of others. As before, he will use up the means of production 1 "When capital is employed in advancing to the workman his wages, it adds nothing to the funds for the maintenance of labour." (Cazenove in note to his edition of Malthus' "Definitions in Pol. But, then, changed into gold, it completes its own second and final metamorphosis, and helps at the same time to accomplish the first metamorphosis of a third commodity. 740 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION dependent upon home agriculture. Hence the magic of money. In time-wages the labour is measured by its immediate duration, in piece-wages by the quantity of products in which the labour has embodied itself during a given time. 506 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION the naturally grown conditions for the maintenance of that circu- lation of matter, it imperiously calls for its restoration as a system, as a regulating law of social production, and under a form appropriate to the full development of the human race. The nature of such wants, whether, for instance, they spring from the stomach or from fancy, makes no differ- ence. MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 411 introduction of the Factory Acts has strikingly shown that the mere shortening of the working-day increases to a wonderful degree the regularity, uniformity, order, continuity, and energy of the labour. 1 On the other hand, in order to make up for the loss of time, an expan- sion occurs of the means of production used in common, of the fur- naces, buildings, &c, in one word, greater concentration of the means of production and a correspondingly greater concourse of workpeople. Consequently much labour is represented in a small compass. The 390 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION it imparts to the product. 6.) As to the fatal consequences of "this system of slavery," as the official report styles it, see I. Nevertheless he doubted the use of steam-engines in navigation. THE LABOUR-PROCESS I9f of the product, or, what amounts to the same thing, upon the fac- tors of the labour-process; ten shillings were paid for the cotton, two shillings for the substance of the spindle worn away, and three- shillings for the labour-power. Before this law the working-day in France was without definite limit. If oxen, steam, or water, be used for driving it, only a few boys and girls as feeders are required. Human labour-power in motion, or human labour, creates value, but is not itself value. If, further, the rate of surplus-value be =100%, this vari- able capital of 3s. The latter first begins to play an important part in the chemical industries. By that means alone can the value of la- bour-power be made to sink, and the portion of the working-day necessary for the reproduction of that value, be shortened. Hence the connexion existing between their various labours appears to them, ideally, in the shape of a preconceived plan of the capitalist, and practically in the shape of the authority of the same capitalist, in the shape of the powerful will of another, who subjects their activity to his aims. Overthrow of Co-operation based on Handicraft and on the Division of Labour We have seen how machinery does away with co-operation based on handicrafts, and with manufacture based on the divi- sion of handicraft labour. of such children, from 8 to 13, as had been employed before noon. Before the exchange we had £40 worth of wine in the hands of A, and £50 worth of corn in those of B, a total value of £90. It is converted into a use-value before it has been converted into money. The circuit G— M— G comes completely to an end, so soon as the money brought in by the sale of one commodity is abstract- ed again by the purchase of another. But we would sooner be prevented from employing boys under the age of 13, or even so high as 14, at all, than not be allowed to employ boys that we do have at night. See the evidence collected by Leonard Horner himself, Nos. Rep. An in- creased quantity of the article has perhaps to be delivered within a given time. The room was not bare of furniture, and there was a fire in it. 3 3 families George Street, No. 128 . If the day be lengthened by 4 hours, viz., from 12 hours to 16, the proportional magnitudes of surplus-value and value of labour-power, of surplus-labour and necessary labour, continue unchanged, but the absolute magnitude of surplus-value rises from 3 shillings to 4, that of the surplus-labour from 6 hours to 8, an increment of 33-^-%. Nothing can be more childish than the dogma, that because every sale is a purchase, and every purchase a sale, therefore the circulation of commodities necessarily implies an equilibrium of sales and purchases. The particular kind of commodity to which it sticks is at first a matter of accident. For this work I get 10s. I could saie somewhat." The complaints of these old chroniclers are always exaggerated, but they reflect faithfully the impression made on contempcraries by the revolution in the conditions of production. THE MODERN THEORY OP COLONISATION 773 som which the labourer pays to the capitalist for leave to retire from the wage-labour market to the land. But this dreadful "last hour," about which you have invented more stories than have the millenarians about the day of judg- ment, is "all bosh." If it goes, it will cost neither you, your net profit, nor the boys and girls whom you employ, their "purity of mind." 1 Whenever your "last hour" strikes in earnest, think 1 If, on the one hand, Senior proved that the net profit of the manufac- turer, the existence of the English cotton industry, and England's command of the markets of the world, depend on "the last working-hour," on the other hand, Dr. Andrew Ure showed, that if children and young persons under 18 years of age, instead of being kept the full 12 hours in the warm and pure moral atmosphere of the factory, are turned out an hour sooner into the heartless and frivolous outer world, they will be deprived, by idleness and vice, of all hope of salvation for their souls. If we reverse the process, we cannot comprehend either the one or the other. The buyer converts money back into commodities before he has turned commodities into money: in other words, he achieves the second metamorphosis of commodities before the first. Mirabeau's "Impossible! ne me dites jamais ce bete de mot!" is particularly applicable to modern technology. We simply get a value of £110, which is in exactly the same condition and fitness for commencing the expanding process, as the original £100 was. The property which the magnet possesses of at- tracting iron, became of use only after by means oi that property the po- larity of the magnet had been discovered. c, p. The moral character of girls bred in these schools, when married women, was shown above. The division of this product into revenue and additional capital remaining the same, the con- sumption of the capitalist may, therefore, increase without any decrease in the fund of accumulation. And only the destruction of rural domestic industry can give the internal market of a country that extension and consistence which the capitalist mode of production requires. If the use of machinery in agriculture is for the most part free from the injurious physical effect it has on the factory operative, its action in superseding to the bearing of these isolated elements of transformation, not only practi- cally made the factory system the sole foundation of his experiments, but also declared that system to be theoretically the starting-point of the social revolution. The latter is deducible from form B, the expanded form of value, the essential component element of which, we saw, is form A, 20 yards of linen =1 coat or x commodity A =y commodity B. I mean Aris- totle. But only in so far as it is itself a product of labour, and, therefore, potentially variable in value, can gold serve as a measure of value. The transmitting mechanism, composed of fly-wheels, shafting, toothed wheels, pullies, straps, ropes, bands, pinions, and gearing of the most varied kinds, reg- ulates the motion, changes its form where necessary, as for in- stance, from linear to circular, and divides and distributes it among the working machines. c, Vol. But the rate of profit ^=|i^=20%. On the share (overestimated by Marx) of Lau- rent and Gerhardt in the determination of this important fact see Kopp, "Ent wicklung der Chemie." Munchen, 1873, pp. They are both money, and therefore are not qualitatively different use-values; for money is but the converted form of commodities, in which their particular use-values vanish. 97, 98.) , , 2 "Est-il question d'executer un travail complique, plusieurs choses doiveut etre faites simultanement. 59, 60.) AlacCulloch in "The Litera- ture of Political Economy, a classified catalogue, Lond. It follows therefore that the daily and weekly wages, &c, may remain the same, although the price of labour falls constant- ly. The determination of the price of labour by: daily value of labour-pow er working-day of a given number of hours ' shows that a mere prolongation of the working-day lowers the price of labour, if no compensation steps in. 3 "In some parts of the Highlands of Scotland, not many years ago, every peasant, according to the Statistical Account, made his own shoes of leather tanned by himself. Birmingham has the monopoly of this industry in the United Kingdom, and at present produces thousands of millions of steel- pens. Although existing only in the promise of the buyer to pay, it causes the commodity to change hands. Duffy: "I have seen when the children could none of them keep their eyes open for the work; indeed, none of us could." J. 327-328.) 486 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION material supplied by commerce, is the gradual alteration of the in^ struments of labour. 2 So long as trade is 1 From this we may judge of the absurdity of J. . And in a spirit yet more "liberal" than the English Factory Acts, the "Reglement orga- nique" has known how to facilitate its own evasion. . But it by no means states the converse, that iron is directly exchangeable for gold. Howitt, a man who makes a speciality of Christianity, says: "The barbarities and 1 "The Natural and Artificial Rights of Property Contrasted." Lond., 1832, pp. of Fact., 31st Oct., 1865," pp. If then the unnatural extension of the working-day, that capital necessarily strives after in its unmeasured passion for self-expansion, shortens the length of life of the individual labourer, and therefore the duration of his labour-power, the forces used up have to be re- placed at a more rapid rate and the sum of the expenses for the reproduction of labour-power will be greater; just as in a machine the part of its value to be reproduced every day is greater the more rapidly the machine is worn out. On the contrary, it is because his labour converts the cotton and spindles into yarn, because he spins, that the values of the cotton and spindles go over to the yarn of their own accord. This subject one must study in detail, to see what the bourgeoisie makes of itself and of the labourer, wherever it can, without restraint, model the world after its own image. But if the public funds are to be devoted to assist 1 "The only thing, of which one can say, that it is stored up and pre- pared beforehand, is the skill of the labourer.... They are categories for the phenomenal forms of essential relations. 1. The ine- qualities would be compensated for the society at large, but not for the individual masters. On the other hand, in the product, in the 36 lbs. On the other hand, all labour is the expenditure of human labour-power in a special form and with a definite aim, and in this, its character of concrete useful labour, it produces use-values. Whilst in prison they are to be whipped as much and as often as the justices of the peace think fit. No- body — not even "a musician of the future" — can live upon future products, or upon use-values in an unfinished state; and ever since the first moment of his appearance on the world's stage, man always has been, and must still be a consumer, both before and while he is producing. . Three girls of 13, at wages of from 6 shillings to 8 shillings a week, have replaced the one man of mature age, of wages varying from 18 shillings to 45 shillings." (Th. de Quincey: "The Logic of Political Econ.," Lon- don, 1844. Comm., II. per hour. Urquhart: "Familiar Words." Lond., 1855, p. Few, even of those whose lives are unusually long, can accumulate great masses of wealth." 2 The labourers most distinctly decline to allow the capitalist to abstain from the payment of the greater part of their labour. . Or because the labourer takes seriously the appearance of piece-wages, viz., that his product is paid for, and not his labour- power, and therefore revolts against a lowering of wages, unaccom- panied by a lowering in the selling price of the commodity. But this is just the case with that minimum mass of gold, which is capable of being replaced by paper money. He ap- proached to republicanism in his political principles." ("The Bee." By James Anderson, 18 Vols., Vol. With the accumulation of rents in Ireland, the accumulation of the Irish in America keeps pace. The value of a commodity, there- fore, varies directly as the quantity, and inversely as the produc- tiveness, of the labour incorporated in it. The continuous rise in the price of corn, wool, meat, in a word of all agricultural produce, swelled the money capital of the farmer without any action on his part, whilst the rent he paid (being calculated on the old value of money) diminished in reality. that the principal strength of an army consisteth in the infantry or foot* And to make good infantry it requireth men bred, not in a servile or indigent fash- ion, but in some free and plentiful manner. I therefore call it the constant part of capital, or, more shortly, constant capital. The surplus-produce increased, al- though the total produce, of which it formed a fraction, decreased. Hence, even when prices, rapidity of currency, and the extent of the economy in payments, are given, the quantity of money current and the mass of commodities circulating during a given period, such as a day, no longer correspond. 2 For this latter function, the genuine money-commodity, actual gold and silver, is necessary. 13). It is this spontaneously developed 1 "Division of labour proceeds from the separation of professions the most widely different to that division, where several labourers divide between them the preparation of one and the same product, as in manufacture. Reports, &c, for 31st October, 1850, pp. p. Instinctively they conform to the laws imposed by the nature of commodities. Two coats may therefore express the quantity of value of 40 yards of linen, but they can never express the quantity of their own value. 2 With other things he says naively: "But if our poor" (technical term for labourers) "will live luxuriously . The General form of \a!ue 1 coat 10 lbs. x In the 10 years from 1856 to 1866, England exported to India and China £120,000,000 in silver, which had been re- ceived in exchange for Australian gold. This first period, during which machinery con- quers its field of action, is of decisive importance owing to the ex- traordinary profits that it helps to produce. His person, or rather his pocket, is the point from which the money starts and to which it returns. Cependant ils croient que la production de richesse qui resulte des travaux des artisans consiste dans l'augmentation de la valeur venale de leurs ou- vrages." (Quesnay: "Dialogues sur le Commerce et les Travaux des Artisans," pp. Such a raw material, though itself a product, may have to go through a whole series of different processes: in each of these in turn, it serves, with constantly varying form, as raw material, until the last process of the series leaves it a perfect product, ready for individual consumption, or for use as an in- strument of labour. These they laid before a celebrated 722 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION immediate results of the Reformation were not its most lasting ones. 48.) 340 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION manner incompatible with the nature of castes, to ossify them into guilds. These re- gisseurs themselves were sometimes noblemen. They declare with one voice before the jury that ten or twelve years before, their labour only lasted eight hours a-day. xxxii in the Report of H. That period, roughly speaking, extends from the middle of the 16th to the last third of the 18th century. All bounds of morals and nature, age and sex, day and night, were broken down. A "barbarising tend- ency of dispersion" of producers and national wealth. c, p. In the following three years, 1863-1865, there was a progressive rise in the price of meat, butter, milk, sugar, salt, coals, and a number of other necessary means of subsistence. They did not, for example, comprehend that machinery is the surest means of length- ening the working-day. He lets the money go, but only with the sly inten- tion of getting it back again. "Two souls, alas, do dwell within his breast; The one is ever parting from the other." 1 At the historical dawn of capitalist production,— and every capitalist upstart has personally to go through this historical stage — avarice, and desire to get rich, are the ruling passions. 2 In those agricultural districts, "where a minimum in the employment of women exists, the death-rate is on the other hand very low. the products ... He then proceeds to consume the commodity, the labour-power that he has just bought, by causing the labourer, the impersonation of that labour-power, to consume the means of production by his labour. Even if that capital was orig- inally acquired by the personal labour of its employer, it sooner or later becomes value appropriated without an equivalent, the unpaid labour of others materialised either in money or in some oth- er object. A water-wheel is necessary to exploit the force of water, and a steam-engine to exploit the elasticity of steam. Between the two there is a strict correlation. "It is, however, in reality, impossible (it; jjlsv gov akrfisia dSovaiov), that such unlike things can be com- mensurable"— i.e., qualitatively equal. Thus the desire for social changes, and the class antagonisms are brought to the same level in the country as in the towns. If we consider the process of production from the point of view of the simple labour-process, the labourer stands in relation to the means of production, not in their quality as capital, but as the mere means and material of his own intelligent productive activity. With the churka invented some years ago by Dr. Forbes, one man and a boy produce 250 lbs. but ... "Their powers are always upon the stretch, they cannot live cheaper than they do, nor work harder." 2 Protestantism, by changing almost all the traditional holidays into workdays, plays an important part in the genesis of capital. It reduces the surplus-labour and surplus-value. 8.) THE WORKING-DAY 299 tries, such as nail-making, 1 had long since fallen as completely under capitalist exploitation as the factories themselves. The weekly average of meat (bacon, etc.) varied from 1-r ounces for the silk- weavers, to I8-7- ounces for the kid-glovers; total average for the different categories 13.6 ounces. For an adulteress and adul- terer do one another great service and pleasure. "Improvements" of towns, accompanying the increase of wealth, by the demolition of badly built quarters, the erection of palaces for banks, ware- houses, &c, the widening of streets for business traffic, for the carriages of luxury, and for the introduction of tramways, &c, drive away the poor into even worse and more crowded hiding places. — F.E.] MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 505 the labourers is more intense, and finds less resistance, as we shall see later in detail. Saturday we leave off at 6 p. Beecher Stowe, authoress of "Uncle Tom's Cabin," with great magnificence in London to show her sympathy for the negro slaves of the American republic — a sym- pathy that she prudently forgot, with her fellow-aristocrats, during the civ- il war, in which every "noble" English heart beat for the slave-owner — I gave in the New York Tribune the facts about the Sutherland slaves. Gamier, vol. In the above examples, by the simply quantitative addition of CH 2 to the molecular formula, a qualitatively differ- ent body is each time formed. 1 1. Aft- erwards he is controlled by others. Suppose that 80 per cent, were capitalised and 20 per cent, eaten up, the accumulated capital will be £2,400 or £1,200, ac- cording as the total surplus-value has amounted to £3,000 or £1,500. It is the denomination and currency of the money that men regard in bargaining, and not the quantity of silver... In April 1866, 18 years after the publication of the work of Robert Somers quoted above, Professor Leone Levi gave a lec- ture before the Society of Arts on the transformation of sheep-walks into deer-forest, in which he depicts the advance in the devastation of the Scot- tish Highlands. "The value of any commodity de- noting its relation in exchange, we may speak of it as ... 42, 43, 44. Hand in hand with this centralisation, or this expropriation of many capitalists by few, develop, on an ever-extending scale, the co- operative form of the labour-process, the conscious technical application of science, the methodical cultivation of the soil, the transformation of the instruments of labour into instruments of labour only usable in common, the economising of all means of production by their use as the means of production of combined, socialised labour, the entanglement of all peoples in the net of the world-market, and with this, the international character of the capitalistic regime. Being poles they are as necessarily opposite as they are connected. From the reign of Edward III. This purely symbolic character is to a certain extent masked in metal tokens. 1 The competition between hand-weaving and power-weaving in England, before the passing of the Poor Law of 1833, was prolonged by supplementing the wages, which had fallen considerably below the minimum, with parish relief. The property therefore which labour-power in action, living labour, possesses of preserving value, at the same time that it adds it, is a gift of Nature which costs the labourer nothing, but which is very advantageous to the capitalist inasmuch as it preserves the existing value of his capital. . c.) Locke says, "The universal consent of mankind erave to silver, on account of its qualities which made it suitable for money, an imaginary value." Law, on the other hand, "How could different nations give an imaginary value to any single thing... 90. Linguet, "Theorie des Lois Civiles, &c." London, 1767, t. IV. of yarn, whose value is equal to the surplus-value, created by his surplus-labour during half a day. Of this 4 lbs. The change must, therefore, take place in the commodity bought by the first act, M— C, but not in its value, for equivalents are exchanged, and the commodity is paid for at its full value. When the business of making the bread, rolls, &c, is over, that of its distribution begins, and a considerable proportion of the journeymen in the trade, after working hard in the manner described during the night, are upon their legs for many hours during the day, carrying baskets, or wheeling hand-carts, and sometimes again in the bakehouse, leaving off work at various hours between 1 and 6 p. Read, e.g., the naive Annals of Commerce of the worthy A. In those letters this passage occurs: "Capital must be rescued not only from labour, but from itself, and that will be best effected, by treating the acts of the industrial capitalist as economic and political functions, that have been delegated to him with his capital, and by treating his profit as a form of salary, because we still know no other social organisation. V. Petty: "Quantulumcunque " p. iii.. Meanwhile, they become degraded, they fall ill, one and all, whilst the mildly liberal Forster, M.P., sheds tears over the blessings of Free-trade, and the profits of the eminent men of Bradford who deal in worsted. 1 We have already seen, from the most elementary expression of value, x commodity A=y commodity B, that the object in which the magnitude of the value of another object is represented, appears to have the equivalent form independently of this rela- tion, as a social property given to it by Nature. If therefore, the capitalist who applies the new method, sells his commodity at its social value of one shil- ling, he sells it for threepence above its individual value, and thus realises an extra surplus-value of threepence. On the contrary, the daily or weekly wages may rise, although the price of labour remains constant or even falls. "Both were still gainers: the worker because he was advanced the fruits of his labour" (should read: of the unpaid labour of other workers) "before the work was done" (should read: before his own labour had borne fruit); "the employer (le maitre), because the labour of this worker was worth more than his wages" (should read: produced more value than the value of his wages). This is a superior class of workmen, some of them scientifically educated, others brought up to a trade; it is distinct from the factory operative class, and merely aggregated to it. gg2 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION been in very rapid increase, and the household circumstances of the labourer are now in the highest degree deplorable. But it costs less labour to build one workshop for twenty persons than to build ten to accommodate two weavers each; thus the value of the means of production that are concentrated for use in common on a large scale does not increase in direct proportion to the expan- sion and to the increased useful effect of those means. In 1833 they had howled out in threatening fashion, "if the liberty of working children of any age for 10 hours a day were taken away, it would stop their works." x It would be impossible for them to buy a sufficient num- ber of children over 13. 36.) 2 "Though the manufacturer" (i.e., the labourer) "has his wages ad- vanced to him by his master, he in reality costs him no expense, the val- ue of these wages being generally reserved, together with a profit, in the improved value of the subject upon which his labour is bestowed." (A. As capitalist produc- tion, accumulation, and wealth, become developed, the capital- ist ceases to be the mere incarnation of capital. 64.) 4 This circumstance is mentioned only for the sake ol completeness, for I shall not consider the rate of profit, i.e., the ratio of the surplus-value to the total capital advanced, until I come to the third book. C — M. The unpaid labour of the men was made ... The lower mid- dle-classes, the small manufacturers, the shopkeepers, the artisan, the peasant, all these fight against the bourgeoisie, to save from extinction their existence as fractions of the middle-ciass ... "They only exist now by first defrauding the public, and next getting 18 hours' work out of their men for 12 hours' wages." 3 The adulteration of bread and the formation of a class of bakers that sells the bread below the full price, date from the beginning of the 18th century, from the time when the corpo- rate character of the trade was lost, and the capitalist in the form of the miller or flour-factor, rises behind the nominal master baker. Self-earned private property, that is based, so to say, on the fusing together of the isolated, independent labouring-individual with the conditions of his labour, is supplanted by capitalistic private property, which rests on exploitation of the nominally free labour of others, i.e., on wage-labour. c, p. would eventually fall— whether on landlord, or lessee, or labourer, or public. Six victims of starvation in one week! 2 "Child. Our capitalist foresaw this state of things, and that was the cause of his laughter. The peasant, expropriated and cast adrift, must buy their value in the form of wages, from liis new master, the industrial capitalist. Polit." 3eme ed. Value exists only in articles of utility, in objects: we leave out of consideration its purely symbolical representation by tokens. In not less than 22 parishes, however, the destruction of houses has not prevent- ed increase of population, or has not brought about that expul- sion which, under the name "migration to towns," generally oc- curs. Like the increased exploitation of natural wealth by the mere increase in the tension of labour-power, science and technol- ogy give capital a power of expansion independent of the given magnitude of the capital actually functioning. 2 Is any capital set free by this metamorphosis? 1. c, vol. But further, apart from the class of lazy annuitants thus created, and from the improvised wealth of the financiers, middlemen between the government and the na- tion — as also apart from the tax-farmers, merchants, private manufacturers, to whom a good part of every national loan renders the service of a capital fallen from heaven— the national debt has given rise to joint-stock companies, to dealings in negotiable effects of all kinds, and to agiotage, in a word to stock-exchange gambling and the modern bankocracy. 2 1 "On doit encore remarquer que cette division partielle de travail peut se faire quand meme les ouvriers sont occupes d'une meme besogne. II, p 150.) 2 "L'ouvrier prete son industrie," but adds Storch slyly: he "risks noth- ing" except "de perdre son salaire ... Such change of price holds good only in the case of commodities whose value remains constant. Now suppose we have a working-day whose length, and whose apportion- ment between necessary labour and surplus-labour, are given. 2,015,237,851 lbs. Examples are, the irrigation works in Egypt, 1 Lombardy, Holland, or in India and Persia where irrigation by means of artificial canals, not only supplies the soil with the water indis- pensable to it, but also carries down to it, in the shape of sedi- ment from the hills, mineral fertilisers. Jones: "Textbook of Lectures on the Pol. 2 "Si I'argent represente, dans nos mains, les choses que nous pouvons desirer d'acheter, il y represente aussi les choses que nous avons vendues pour cet argent." (Mercier de la Riviere, 1. 8 Whether the woollen manufacture ol england is not divided into several parts or branches appropriated to particular places, where they are only or principally manufactured; fine cloths in Somersetshire, coarse in Yorkshire, long ells at Exeter, soies at Sudbury, crapes at Norwich, linseys 354 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION lonial system and the opening out of the markets of the world, both of which are included in the general conditions of existence of the manufacturing period, furnish rich material for developing the division of labour in society. Capital further developed into a coercive relation, which compels the working-class to do more work than the narrow round of its own life-wants prescribes. Of these 3 half-hours, one yields 1/23X^H5,000=«£5,000; i.e., it makes up for the wear and tear of the machinery; the remaining 2 half-hours, i.e., the last hour, yield 2/23 X<£1 15,000=^10,000 or the net profit. In simple circulation, C — M — C, the value of commodities attained at the most a form independent of their use-values, i.e., the form of money; but that same value now in the circulation M— C— M, or the circulation of capital, suddenly presents itself as an independent substance, endowed with a motion of its own, passing through a life-process of its own, in which money and commodities are mere forms which it assumes and casts off in turn. will produce a daily surplus-value of 300s., and one of n times 3s. 1830, p. 173.) "Nous rencontrons chez les peuples parvenus a un certain degr6 de civilisation trois genres de divisions d'industrie: la premiere, que nous nommerons generale, amene la distinction des producteurs en agriculteurs, manufacturiers et com- mercants, elle se rapporte aux trois principales branches d'industrie natio- nale; la seconde, qu'on pourrait appeler sp^ciale, e9t la division de chaque genre d'industrie en especes ... We found her ill from want of food, lying on a mattress in her clothes, and just covered with a strip of carpet, for all the bedding had been pawned. to-rd., as every piece now 1 1 1 only represents-^- instead of — of a working-hour. When the revolution of the world-market, about the end of the 15th century, annihilated Northern Italy's commercial supremacy, a movement in the reverse direction set in. He himself is a practical man; and though he does not always consider what he says outside his business, yet in his business he knows what he is about. can really be effectual unless the population themselves assist in putting it into operation?" "Many a man might wish to object to employing a boy, but he would perhaps become marked by it." (n. Were they obliged to toil the year round, the whole six days in the week, in a repetition of the same work, might it not blunt their ingenuity, and render them stupid in- stead of alert and dexterous; and might not our workmen lose their reputation instead of maintaining it by such eternal slavery? Of these 23- 23rds (constituting the whole £115,000) twenty, that is to say £100,000 out of the £115,000, simply replace the capital;— one twenty-third (or £5,000 out of the £115,000) makes up for the de- terioration of the mill and machinery. They take the shape, in the transactions of society, of services in kind and payments in kind. 3 In undertakings that involve much capital outlay, such as railways, &c, the contractor himself generally provides his army with wooden huts and the like, thus improvising 1 I. How far employment is thereby found for an increased number of men, depends, given the length of the working-day and the in- tensity of labour, on the composition of the capital employed, i.e., on the ratio of its constant to its variable component. Let us take two commodities, e.g., corn and iron. 239.) 2 "L'echange qui se fait de deux valeurs egales n'augmente ni ne dimi- nue la masse des valeurs subsistantes dans la societe. A may be clever enough to get the advantage of B or G without their being able to retaliate. The value of silver being for that purpose estimated at its price in the London market. The subor- dination of labour to capital was only formal — i.e., the mode 738 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION of production itself had as yet no specific capitalistic character. Very different com- binations are clearly possible, according as one of the three fac- tors is constant and two variable, or two constant and one vari- able, or lastly, all three simultaneously variable. To this is to be add- ed scanty school furniture, deficiency of books, and other mate- rials for teaching, and the depressing effect upon the poor children themselves of a close, noisome atmosphere. An industrial army of workmen, under the command of a capitalist, requires, like a real army, officers (managers), and ser- geants (foremen, overlookers), who, while the work is being done, command in the name of the capitalist. The special skill of each individual insignificant factory operative vanishes as an infinitesimal quantity before the science, the gigantic physical forces, and the mass of la- bour that are embodied in the factory mechanism and, together with that mechanism, constitute the power of the "master." This "master," therefore, in whose brain the machinery and his mo- nopoly of it are inseparably united, whenever he falls out with his "hands," contemptuously tells them: "The factory operatives should keep in wholesome remembrance the fact that theirs is really a low species of skilled labour; and that there is none which is more easily acquired, or of its quality more amply remunerated, or which by a short training of the least expert can be more quickly, as well as abundantly, acquired. Lady Orkney's endearing offices are supposed to have been — fceda labiorum ministerial (In the Sloane Manuscript Collection, at the British Museum, No. 4224. 3, 4. The latter method is the only materialistic, and therefore the only scientific one. is taken from the second book of Plato's Republic." 2 Thus, in the Odyssey xiv., 228, "AUo<; fop t'SUoicjiv dvtjp femt.pTtetai fpYOi?," and Archilochus in Saxtus Empiricus, "aUo? . 1869. It is the same as if he worked 3 days in the week for him- self, and 3 days in the week gratis for the capitalist. First, a commodity comes face to face with money; the latter is the form taken by the value of the former, and exists in all its hard reality, in the pocket of the buyer. The English Factory Inspectors, on the other hand, declared that the Home Secretary had no power dictatorially to suspend the law, and continued their legal proceedings against the pro-slavery rebellion. Oekon. But if, in consequence of increased pro- ductiveness, the value of the necessaries of life fall, and the value of a day's labour-power be thereby reduced from five shillings to three, the surplus-value increases from one shilling to three. The wage-form thus extinguishes every trace of the division of the working-day into necessary la- bour and surplus-labour, into paid and unpaid labour. there could not be a change of relative magnitude in the value of labour-power without a change in its absolute magnitude. The other classes perish and disappear in the face of Modern Industry, the proletariat is its special and essential product... The capitalist system pre-supposes the complete separation of the labourers from all property in the means by which they can realise their labour. By the purchase of his commodity he throws money into circulation, in order to withdraw it again by the sale of the same commodity. The state of things described as incidental to lace finishing is here repeated, save that instead of the "mistresses' houses," we find what are called "lace-schools," kept by poor women in their cot- tages. of Insp. He has reached the zero from which are dated the calculations of the farmer. Hence although the movement of the money is merely the expression of the circulation of commodities, yet the contrary appears to be the actual fact, and the circulation of commodities seems to be the result of the movement of the money. THE MODERN THEORY OF COLONISATION 767 For the understanding of the following discoveries of Wake- field, two preliminary remarks: We know that the means of pro- duction and subsistence, while they remain the property of the immediate producer, are not capital. 6d. l The" combined working-day produces, relatively to an equal sum of isolated working-days, a greater quantity of use-values, and, consequently, diminishes the labour-time necessary for the production of a given useful effect. 37, 43 passim. of cotton for £110, I have, in fact, exchanged £100 for £110, money for money. At the same time it also makes the accomplishment of this transubstantiation quite accidental. Machinery, it is true, cheapens the nec- essaries of life, but it also cheapens the labourer." ("A Prize Essay on the Comparative Merits of Competition and Co-operation." London, 1834, p. . No wonder that explosions have increased progressively, both in number and extent (sometimes with a loss of 200-300 men), during the last MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 503 ten years. It is, however, to be regretted that he ventures on such haphazard assertions as the following: "By greater pulverising and more frequent ploughing, the cir- culation of air in the interior of porous soil is aided, and the surface exposed to the action of the atmosphere is increased and renewed; but it is easily seen that the increased yield of the land cannot be proportional to the labour spent on that land, but increases in a much smaller proportion. V. 2 Since the quality and intensity of the work are here controlled by the form of wage itself, superintendence of labour becomes in great part superfluous. ... . 2 The fund resulting from the sale of land at a price relatively pro- hibitory for the wage-workers, this fund of money extorted from the wages of labour by violation of the sacred law of supply and demand, the Government is to employ, on the other hand, in proportion as it grows, to import have-nothings from Europe into the colonies, and thus keep the wage-labour market full for the capitalists. "The worst is that the brickmakers despair of themselves. In the case we are considering the same working-time is materialised in the 10 lbs. 531.) A working miner objects to the 17th section of the Act of 1860; he says, "At the present time, if the inspector of mines finds a part of the mine unfit to work in, he has to report it to the mine-owner and the Home Secretary. On the one hand, it arises from the union of various independent handicrafts, which become stripped of their independence and specialised to such an extent as to be re- duced to mere supplementary partial processes in the production of one particular commodity. 81.) $42 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION was 17; while at Liverpool those figures were represented as 35 against 15. as late as 7 o'clock in the evening." (1. ur . Thanks to the elasticity of labour- power, the domain of accumulation has extended without any previous enlargement of constant capital. . 4, it was declared perpetual, and in fact only in 1834 did it take a new and harsher iormJ These 1 Dr. Hunter, 1. l The less labour it contains, the less value leaves pressure of steam and piston speed out of consideration. This increased expenditure demands a larger income. to 5s. The law, finally, that always equilibrates the relative surplus-population, or industrial reserve army, to the extent and energy of accumulation, this law rivets the labour- er to capital more firmly than the wedges of Vulcan did Prometheus to the rock. 671.) The women earn by the same working-time a week's wage of only 5 shillings. c, p. In like manner, if the productiveness of his own labour varies by rising or falling, he will in one hour spin either more or less cotton, as the case may be, than he did before, and will consequently preserve in the product of one hour, more or less value of cotton; but, all the same, he will preserve by two hours' labour twice as much value as he will by one. The legal limita- tion of the working-day puts an end to such mischief, although not, of course, to the diminution of employment caused by the competition of machinery, by changes in the quality of the labour- ers employed, and by crises partial or general. Represent- ing on the one hand a sold commodity, it represents on the other a commodity to be bought. 1 13 Wymer Street, No. 19 . Smith's days, and was repeated in various works down to the beginning of the 19th century; a theory which Malthus, that master in plagiarism (the whole of his population theory is a shameless plagiarism), appropriated to himself in 1815; which West developed at the same time as, and independently of, Anderson; which in the year 1817 was connected by Ricardo with the general theory of value, then made the round of the world as Ricardo's theory, and in 1820 was vulgarised by James Mill, the father of John Stuart Mill; and which, finally, was reproduced by John Stuart Mill and others, as a dogma already quite commonplace, and known to every schoolboy. . E.\ 48 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION developing the expression of value implied in the value-relation of commodities, from its simplest, almost imperceptible outline, to the dazzling money-form. I would instance the lifting of a large tree on to a wain ... 7— d., stocking-weavers 2s. For the rest, in respect to the phenomenal form, "value and price of labour," or "wages," as contrasted with the essential relation manifested therein, viz., the value and price of labour-power, the same difference holds that holds in respect to all phenomena and their hidden substratum. What a happy life the Irish factory operative leads, one exam- ple will show: "On my recent visit to the North of Ireland," says the English Factory Inspector, Robert Baker, "I met with the follow- ing evidence of effort in an Irish skilled workman to afford edu- cation to his children; and I give his evidence verbatim, as I took it from his mouth. The Jewish historian has remarked upon the overthrow of Jerusalem by Titus that it was no wonder it should have .been destroyed, with such a signal destruction, when an inhuman mother sacrificed her own offspring to satisfy the cravings of absolute hunger." ("Public Economy Concentrated." Carlisle, 1833, p. A beautiful mode of motion this for developed capitalist production! Before, in consequence of the rise of wages, any positive increase of the population really fit for work could occur, the time would have been passed again and again, during 638 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION which the industrial campaign must have been carried through, the battle fought and won. To the wealth of the country it did not the slightest damage. c, xliii. But division of labour is a system of production which has grown up spontaneously and continues to grow behind the backs of the producers. By working, the latter becomes actually, what before he only was potentially, labour-power in action, a labourer. Atheism cannot be of long contin- uance." (P. The value of these additional means of production however, may rise, fall, remain unaltered, be large or small; it has no influence on the process of creation of surplus-value by means of the labour- powers that put them in motion. It was also prohibited in Cologne in 1676, at the same time that its in- troduction into England was causing disturbances among the work- people. Air. 1862.) The undersellers, almost without exception, sell bread adulterated with alum, soap, pearl ashes, chalk, Derbyshire stone- dust, and such like agreeable nourishing and wholesome ingredients. But "the rice-grounds of Geor- gia, or the swamps of the Mississippi may be fatally injurious to the human constitution; but the waste of human life which the cultivation of these districts necessitates, is not so great that it cannot be repaired from the teeming preserves of Virginia and Kentucky. Each labourer produces only some part of a whole, and each part, having no value or utility in itself, there is nothing on which the labourer can seize, and say: It is my product, this 1 will keep to myself." ("Labour Defended against the Claims of Capital." Lond., 1825, p. pp. 2 Between 1851 and 1874, the total number of emigrants amounted to 2,325,922. Hence, in the velocity of the currency we have the fluent unity of the anti- thetical and complementary phases, the unity of the conversion of the useful aspect of commodities into their value-aspect, and their re-conversion from the latter aspect to the former, or the unity of the two processes of sale and purchase. A couple of exam- ples from the Reports of the Inspectors of Factories will suffice on this point. The time necessary for the completion of the whole work is thereby shortened. This, however, ap- pears to be an abuse not essentially appertaining to capitalist production. c, p. The change affects all commodities simultaneously, and, therefore, caeteris paribus, leaves their relative values inter se, unaltered, although those values are now expressed in higher or lower gold-prices. 1 Public meeting of agricultural labourers at Lasswade, near Edinburgh, January 5th, 1866. Then one use-value is just as good as another, provided only it be present in sufficient quantity. In the 8 years from 1853 to 1861 it had increased from the basis taken in 1853 by 20 per cent.! The fact is so astonishing as to be almost incredible. x Hence a flow of people into the cotton-weaving trade, till at length the 800,000 weavers, called into existence by the Jenny, the throstle and the mule, were overwhelmed by the power-loom. The change of value in the case we have been considering, originates, not in the process in which the cotton plays the part of a means of production, and in which it therefore functions as constant capital, but in the process in which the cotton itself ;s produced. At first the steam-engine replaces this labourer, afterwards he must replace the steam-engine. These small manufacturers mostly went to the wall. on Saturday afternoons." 1 "The profit to be gained by it (over-working in violation of the Act) appears to be, to many, a greater temptation than they can resist; they calculate upon the chance of not being found out; and when they see the small amount of penalty and costs, which those who have been convicted have had to pay, they find that if they should be detected there will still be a considerable balance of gain. Hence, for one commodity- owner to meet with another who has money, it is necessary, either, that the product of the labour of the latter person, the buyer, should be in itself money, should be gold, the material of which money consists, or that his product should already have changed its skin and have stripped off its original form of a useful object. Capitalistic production advances there with giant strides, even though the lowering of wages and the dependence of the wage-worker are yet far from being brought down to the normal European level. * By decomposition of handicrafts, by specialisation of the in- struments of labour, by the formation of detail labourers, and by grouping and combining the latter into a single mechanism, division of labour in manufacture creates a qualitative grada- tion, and a quantitative proportion in the social process of production; it consequently creates a definite organisation of the labour of society, and thereby develops at the same time new productive forces in the society. Yet for all that he withdraws 3 shillings more from circu- lation than he originally threw into it. His answer would simply have been: — Gentlemen! 1 Senior, 1. London, 1773, pp. At each mouth of the furnace, there works a group, called "the hole," consisting of one bottlemaker or finisher, one blower, one gatherer, one put- ter-up or whetter-off, and one taker-in. 80. The former gives the finishing touches to the machine-made lace, and includes numerous sub-divisions. The habit of representing surplus-value and value of labour- power as fractions of the value created — a habit that originates in the capitalist mode of production itself, and whose import will hereafter be disclosed — conceals the very transaction that characterises capital, namely the exchange of variable capital for living labour-power, and the consequent exclusion of the labourer from the product. In our own times, the slight and transient fall in the value of gold compared with silver, which was a consequence of the Indo-Chinese demand for silver, produced on a far more extended scale in France the same phenomena, export of silver, and its expulsion from circulation by gold. In all cases it is the poverty of working populations. Thus his gain is — Belore 6 a. We can neither see nor smell in this sum of money a trace of surplus-value. This report deals especially with the agricultural labourers. Econ.,"edit. It was, on the contrary, the invention of machines that made a revolution in the form of steam-engines necessary. . The hardships and the earnings, instead of being directly proportional, as in any just arrangements of society they v would be, are gen- erally in an inverse ratio to one another." To avoid misunderstanding, let me say that although men like John Stuart Mill are to blame for the con- tradiction between their traditional economic dogmas and their modern CONVERSION OP SURPLUS-VALUE INTO CAPITAL 611 al cases, has he the power to enlarge the so-called labour-fund at the expense of the "revenue" of the wealthy. Hence, in the place of the hierarchy of specialised workmen that character- ises manufacture, there steps, in the automatic factory, a tenden- cy to equalise and reduce to one and the same level every kind of work that has to be done by the minders of the machines; 2 in the place of the artificially produced differentiations of the detail workmen, step the natural differences of age and sex. In what follows the chief combi- nations alone are considered. In the first place it strikes one as an odd thing for any one to suppose that these well-worn phrases about the middle ages and the an- cient world are unknown to anyone else. Cotton cloth . * "The cupidity of mill-owners whose cruelties in the pursuit of gain have hardly been exceeded by those perpetrated by the Spaniards on the conquest of America in the pursuit of gold." John Wade, "History ol the Middle and Working Classes," 3rd Ed. London, 1835, p 114. It is reflected in the rise and fall of the Income-tax. Here we find documentary evidence of the con- stant lowering of the price of labour from the beginning of the Anti- Jacobin War. If then his appearance in the market is to be continuous, and the continuous conversion of money into capital assumes this, the seller of labour-power must perpetuate himself, "in the way that every living individual 1 Hence the Roman Villieus, as overlooker of the agricultural slaves, received "more meagre fare than working slaves, because his work was lighter." (Th. Mommsen, Rom. Only very few mills worked full time (60 hours a week), the remainder worked at intervals. He works on his own land, with his own means of production, for, say, 3 days a week. . At that time the contracts for farms ran for a long time, often for 99 years. 4d. MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 377 ly used during the infancy of Modern Industry. 206.) "If each man's labour were but enough to produce his own food, there could be no property." (Ravenstone, 1. of yarn; and similarly with regard to the spindle. But machinery not only acts as a competitor who gets the better of the workman, and is constantly on the point of making him superfluous. . This character comes and goes with the momentary social acts that called it into life. A pearl or a dia- mond is valuable" as a pearl or diamond. 1 The direct barter of products attains the elementary form of the relative expression of value in one respect, but not in an- other. The mechanism of capitalist production and accumulation constantly effects this adjustment. Steuart and others, by A. The Highland Celts were organised in clans, each of which was the owner of the land on which it was settled. To guard against false conclusions from the text, 1 ought here to remark that the English cotton industry, since it was placed under the Factory Act of 1850 with its regulations of labour-time, &c, must be regarded as the model industry of England. The average income of these small landlords. 1 1 In Italy, where capitalistic production developed earliest, the disso- lution of serfdom also took place earlier than elsewhere. (J. In every case he registers with the dogmatism of a disciple, the confusion of his mas- ter's thoughts. 50. The mass of the means of production which he thus transforms, increases with the productiveness of his labour. and why we shall consider all those that refuse us this help as enemies of the reform oi labour and of the rights of the labourer." (Resolution of the Working Men ot Dun- kirk, New York State, 1866.) 2 Reports, &c, for Oct., 1848, p 112. As far, however, as concerns the genesis of the farmer, we can, so to say, put our hand on it, because it is a slow process evolving through many centuries. . See Appen- dix No. 2; Reports, &c, 31st October, 1862, pp. must be advanced in order to exploit daily 100 labour-powers, of n times 3s., in order to exploit daily n labour-powers. 179.) This view, of course, does not prevent the same Mac- Culloch and others of his kidney, when in theoretical difficulties, such, for example, as the question of over-production, from transforming the same capitalist into a moral citizen, whose sole concern is for use-values, and who even develops an insatiable hunger for boots, hats, eggs, calico, and other extremely familiar sorts of use-values. The ancient Assyr- ian, Egyptian, and other collections in London, and in other European capi- tals, make us eye-witnesses of the modes of carrying on that co-operative labour. A commodity is, in the first place, an object outside us, a thing that by its properties satisfies human wants of some sort or another. c, t. . must be of indi- rect benefit to the labouring population, because it cheapens commodities of general consumption. The second and concluding metamorphosis of a commodity Because money is the metamorphosed shape of all other com- modities, the result of their general alienation, for this reason it is alienable itself without restriction or condition. c, p. 302 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION The bargain concluded, it is discovered that he was no "free agent," that the time for which he is free to sell his labour-power is the time for which he is forced to sell it, 1 that in fact the vampire will not lose its hold on him "so long as there is a muscle, a nerve, a drop of blood to be exploited." 2 For "protection" against "the ser- pent of their agonies," the labourers must put their heads together, and, as a class, compel tne passing of a law, an all-powerful social barrier that shall prevent the very workers from selling, by voluntary contract with capital, themselves and their fam- ilies into slavery and death. The product of 6 hours' work has increased six-fold, from 6 lbs. On April 16th, 1863, 20 years later, in the speech in which he introduced his Budget: "From 1842 to 1852 the taxable income of the country increased by 6 per cent. From his point of view, the whole process effectuates nothing more than the exchange of the product of his labour for the product of some one else's, nothing more than an exchange of products. Coarse freedom, a noisy jollity, and ob- scenest impudence give attractions to the gang. If the number of the moves diminish, the total number of pieces increases. 748 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION provided for by industrial capital. The inventions of Vaucanson, Arkwright, Watt, and others, were, however, practicable, only because those inventors found, ready to hand, a considerable number of skilled mechanical workmen, placed at their disposal by the manufac- turing period. 462,513 yds. For the reproduction of this value of four shillings and sixpence, nine hours' labour-time would suf- fice; and consequently three hours of surplus-labour, instead of two, would accrue to the capitalist, and the surplus-value would rise from one shilling to eighteenpence. For this, it is necessary that the labour expended upon it, be of a kind that is socially use- ful, of a kind that constitutes a branch of the social division of labour. These modes therefore imply the possibility, and no more than the possi- bility, of crises. The working-class is thus emersed to support a wretched factory population, a parasitical shop-keeping class, and a fictitious commercial, monetary, and financial system. Modern agriculture dates in England from the middle of the 18th century, although the revolution in landed property, from which the changed mode of production starts as a basis, has a much earlier date. But in no wise conciliated, capital now began a noisy agita- tion that went on for several years. We have now to consider the influence of such changes on the quantitative aspect of the relative expression of value. By this absorption it is in fact changed into yarn, because it is spun, because labour-power in the form of spinning is added to it; but the product, the yarn, is now nothing more than a measure of the labour absorbed by the cotton. 18.4 I Rye, . According to capitalistic anthropology, the age of childhood ended at 10, or at the outside, at 11. Laing, "National Distress," 1844, p. When, therefore, money serves as a measure of value, it is employed only as imaginary or ideal money. 1 were in such short circles, viz., weekly, as happens among poor artisans and labourers, who receive and pay every Saturday, then -tk parts of 1 mil- lion of money would answer these ends; but if the circles be quarterly, ac- cording to our custom of paying rent, and gathering taxes, then 10 millions were requisite. English jurispru- dence, ever the faithful servant of capital, sanctioned in the Court of Common Pleas this piece of pettifogging. xxv., xxvi., n. Sanderson's profit would thus fall to some extent, and this is the good Sandersonian reason why boys cannot learn their handicraft in the day. They (the labourers) become almost the slaves of the tradesman, to whom they owe money." 1 In thy chapters on the "working-day" and "machinery," the reader has seen under what circumstances the British working- class created an "intoxicating augmentation of wealth and power" for the propertied classes. 1 were 2,694 gamekeepers (for the landlords' preserves), in 1869 there were 4,921. And it appears to revolve about money, for money is the beginning and end of this kind of exchange (to vap vojjLtCTjxat oTot/elov xai rapci; t9j<; dMarprj<; ka~(v). 2 It is only the shorten- ing of the labour-time, necessary for the production of a definite quantity of commodities, that is aimed at. l One sum of money is distinguishable from another only by its amount. The alienation of labour-power and its actual appropriation by the buyer, its employment as a use-value, are separated by an inter- val of time. 36,777,334 yds. This fate has already in part overtaken them. His condition is not very different from that of the peasant. Nathaniel Forster, D. This antago- nism between the quantitative limits of money and its qualita- tive boundlessness, continually acts as a spur to the hoarder in his Sisyphus-like labour of accumulating. that not many years ago, an agreement had been made between a London parish and a Lancashire manufacturer, by which it was stipulated, that with every 20 sound children one idiot should be taken." 760 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION of the wage-workers in Europe needed, for its pedestal, slavery pure and simple in the new world. . . During the other period the period of surplus-labour, the usufruct of the labour-power creates a value for the capitalist, that costs him no equivalent. Their morality is at the lowest ebb, ... Those commodities are the precious metals. daily value of labour-power , , , , , the traction: tt^t-. 2 Gold, as we saw, became ideal money, or a measure of values, in consequence of all commodities measuring their values by it, and thus contrasting it ideally with their natural shape as useful objects, and making it the shape of their value. and 9 p. 1 Value, therefore, does not stalk about with a label describing what it is. By confounding these two forms, which overlap each other, some people have been led to look upon the preservation and increase of money ad infinitum as the end and aim of (Economic." (Aristoteles, "De Rep." edit. The labourer, with his wife and child and chattels, is thrown out into the street, and — if he crowds in too large numbers towards quartern of the town where the vestries insist on decency, he is prosecuted in the name of sanitation! Except London, there was at the beginning of the 19th centu- ry no single town in England of 100,000 inhabitants. On the other hand the economists had to contend against the popular prejudice, that confuses capi- talist production with hoarding, 4 and fancies that accumulated 1 "Capital, viz., accumulated wealth employed with a view to profit." (Malthus, 1. It would seem therefore that the interest of capital itself points in the direction of a normal working-day. No doubt he is far from denying that temporary inconveni- ence may result from the capitalist use of machinery. 142: "Seafaring is an art like any other, and cannot, as circumstances require, be carried on as a subsidiary occupation; nay, other subsidiary occupations cannot be car- ried on alongside of this one." If the work, says Plato, has to wait for the labourer, the critical point in the process is missed and the article spoiled, "fpfo'j xaipov SioXXorai." The same Platonic idea is found recurring in the protest of the English bleachers against the clause in the Factory Act that provides fixed meal-times for all operatives. 417, Note.) 560 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION not reckon as labour of normal quality. They managed, in fact, to intimidate the government to such an extent that in 1835 it proposed to lower the limit of the age of childhood from 13 to 12. The prin- ciple of utility was no discovery of Bentham. Yet both are made up of the same chemical substances, carbon (G), hydrogen (H), and oxygen (0), and that, too, in like proportions— namely, C 4 H 8 2 . 298, 299.) "Would it not en- tail very great expense if all these old workings were kept venti- lated?" "Yes, expense might be incurred, but life would be at the same time protected." (n. "Labour being dearer in Ireland than it is in England ... But capital has one single life impulse, the tendency to create value and, surplus-value, to make its constant factor, the means of production, absorb the great- est possible amount of surplus-labour. l In the year 1861 the population alone of the town centres of this industry in Great Britain num- bered 101 ,302. The contradiction of these two diametrically opposed economic systems, manifests itself here practically in a struggle between them. A daughter came home from service with scarlet fever. When the system attained to a certain degree of development, it had to root up this ready-made foun- dation, which in the meantime had been elaborated on the old lines, and to build up for itself a basis that should correspond to its methods of production. In the year 1863, the Privy Council ordered an inquiry into the state of distress of the worst-nourished part of the English working-class. c, p» 159.) "L'economie sur les frais de production ne peu done etre autre chose que l'economie sur a quantity de travail employe" pour produire." (Sismondi, "Etudes," t. same Lime as a single pin might have been either cut or pointed." (Dugald Stewart, 1. the proportion which the other kinds bear to it being easily ascertained." ("Outlines of Pol. Alter 6 p. The total labour-power of society, which is embodied in the sum total of the values of all commodities produced by that society, counts here as one homogeneous mass of human labour- power, composed though it be of innumerable individual units. . 336, 337.) This observation of Ricardo is ol course correct in so far as it is directed against J. Further, a stimulus would be given to the multiplication of the smaller places of work, which are almost invariably the least favourable to the health, comfort, education, and general improvement of the people." 3 In its final report the Commission proposes to subject to the Factory Act more than 1,400,000 children, young persons, and women, of which number about one half are exploited in small industries and by the so-called home-work. In the 17th century attempts had already been made to turn two pairs of millstones with a single water-wheel. The narrow economic conditions under which that agriculture is carried on, will be swept away. From the nature of a population, an increase of labourers cannot be brought into market in consequence of a particular demand till after the lapse of 16 or 18 years, and the conversion of revenue into capital, by saving, may take place much more rapidly; a country is always liable to an increase in the quantity of the funds for the maintenance of labour faster than the increase of population." 2 After Political Economy has thus demonstrated the constant production of a relative surplus-popu- lation of labourers to be a necessity of capitalistic accumulation, she very aptly, in the guise of an old maid, puts in the mouth of her "beau ideal" of a capitalist the following words addressed to those supernumeraries thrown on the streets by their own crea- tion of additional capital: — "We manufacturers do what we can for you, whilst we are increasing that capital on which you must 1 H. Let the quantities of labour-time respectively neces- sary for the production of the linen and the coat vary simul- taneously in the same direction and in the same proportion. He had now come home to dinner quite hungry, as he told us with a melancholy smile, and his dinner consisted of a couple of slices of bread and dripping, and a cup of milkless tea The next door at which we knocked was opened by a middle-aged woman, who, without say- ing a word, led us into a little back parlour, in which sat all her family, silent and fixedly staring at a rapidly dying fire. In their present form (1866) the States must still be considered a European colony. J. It is clear, however, from internal evidence, that it ap- peared in the reign of George II. c, p. The complaints of the Inland Revenue Commissioners of systematic fraud, especially ou the part of the commercial and industrial classes, are repeat- ed in each of their reports. 25,394 No. 52,037 Acres. . The practical difficulties in the way of coining extremely minute quantities of gold or silver, and the circumstance that at first the less precious metal is used as a measure of value instead of the more precious, copper instead of silver, silver instead of gold, and that the less precious circulates as money until dethroned by the more precious— all these facts explain the parts historically played by silver and copper tokens as substitutes for gold coins. One of these rooms, in which 8 people slept, was 12 feet 10 inches long, 12 feet 2 inches broad, 6 feet 9 inches high: the average, without making any deduction for projections into the apartment, gave about 130 cubic feet per head. s. 1 1 "Products are appropriated before they are converted into capital; this conversion does not secure them from such appropriation." (Cherbu- liez: "Richesse ou Pauvrete," edit. of Pol. Fact., 31st October, 1865," p. "If the wealth of a nation," he remarks, "could be decupled by a proclamation, it were strange that such proclamations have not long since been made by our Governors." (1. Such a self-destructive contradiction cannot be in any way even enunciated or formulated as a law. . 4, 5. He has 1 "A day's labour is vague, it may be long or short." ("An Essay on Trade and Commerce, Containing Observations on Taxes, &c." London, 1770. But, however important it may be to value, that it should have some object of utility to embody itself in, yet it is a matter of CONSTANT CAPITAL AND VARIABLE CAPITAL 203 complete indifference what particular object serves this purpose; this we saw when treating of the metamorphosis of commodities. 2 Alum finely powdered, or mixed with salt, is a normal article of com- merce bearing the significant name of "bakers' stuff." 3 Soot is a well-known and very energetic form of carbon, and forms a manure that capitalistic chimney-sweeps sell to English farmers. s , surplus-labour v u necessary labour Both ratios, - and Dece * sary lab(mr , express the same thing in different ways; in the one case by reference to materialised, incor- porated labour, in the other by reference to living, fluent labour. . That the love of lucre induces an easy belief in such miracles, and that sycophant doctrinaires are never wanting to prove them, is vouched for by the following incident of historical ce- lebrity. The old, often-told story, 1 was once more recounted. of Fact.," 31st Oct., 1855, p. For the movement, in the course of which it adds surplus-value, is its own movement, its expansion, therefore, is automatic expansion. 1821-1831 1.446 „ 1831-1841 1.326 „ 1841-1851 1.216 „ 1851-1861 1.141 „ Let us now, on the other hand, consider the increase of wealth. 1 I allude here to hammered nails, as distinguished from nails cut out and made bv machinery. It also enters as raw ma- terial into its own production in the shape of seed; coal, too, is at the same time the product of, and a means of production in, coal-mining. Cloth, during the last six months of 1866, was almost unsaleable. 108, 109. 2 1 We shall inquire, in another place, what circumstances in relation to productivity may modify this law for individual branches of industry. In the middle, between these two stages, comes the glass melting proper, the manipulation of the fluid mass. I, p. Tables showing the estimated average produce, &c, Dublin, 1866." These statistics are official, an! laid before Parliament annually. His un- fortunate situation will fully appear, by taking a comparative view of it, only forty years ago, and at present. s. Whatever be the proportion of surplus-value which the industrial capitalist retains for himself, or yields up to others, he is the one who, in the first instance, appropriates it. m. In one of the most oppressed agricultural districts of England, Buckinghamshire, the labourers, in March, 1867, made a great strike for the raising of their weekly wage from 9-10 shillings to 12 shillings. Equivalent has been exchanged for equivalent. COMMODITIES 83 system, does not its superstition come out as clear as noon-day, whenever it treats of capital? Near his work? Without any doubt, the shortening of the hours of labour .... G. Let us make this clear once more by briefly reviewing the consecutive phases of motion whose culminating point is capitalist accumulation. The Christian religion, e.g., is "useful," "because it forbids in the name of religion the same faults that the penal code condemns in the name of the 610 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION of the process of production, as, e.g., its sudden expansions and contractions, nay, even accumulation itself, become perfectly inconceivable. All colliers are bound ['bound,' an expression which, like bondage, dates from the age of serf- dom] to the colliery lessee or owner for twelve months If the colliers express discontent, or in any way annoy the 'viewer,' a mark of memorandum is made against their names, and, at the annual 'binding,' such men are turned off It appears to me that no part of the 'truck system' could be worse than what obtains in these densely-populated districts. But in no case would his surplus-product arise from some- occult quality inherent in human labour. "So far, the semi-mercantilist reaction of Ganilh is not altogether without foundation." (Wilhelm Roscher: "Die Grundlagen der Nationaloekonomie," 3rd Edn., 1858, pp. The currency of money is the constant and monotonous repetition of the same process. rising and falling in ... 41-42. . The spindles and looms, formerly scattered over the face of the country, are now crowded together in a few great labour-barracks, together with the labourers and the raw material. In manufacture, the revolution in the mode of production begins with the labour-power, in modern industry it begins with the instruments of labour. Such last-mentioned article, by becoming the equivalent of various other commodities, acquires at once, though within narrow limits, the character of a general social equivalent. * Census 1. Periodical epidemics speak on this point as clearly as the diminishing mil- itary standard in Germany and France. 2 The Roman Empire had handed down the elementary form of all machinery in the water-wheel. The difficulty in forming a concept of the money-form, con- sists in clearly comprehending the universal equivalent form, and as a necessary corollary, the general form of value, form G. At the present time (1871) he has to mind with the help of 5 piecers 2,200 spindles, and produces not less than seven times as much yarn as in 1841." (Alex. Since, further, the ratio surplus working-time, determines the rate of the surplus, necessary working-time, value, the latter is given by the ratio of B G to A B. w f . He says, with other things: "Depopulation and transforma- tion into sheep-walks were the most convenient means for getting an income without expenditure... THE RATE OP SURPLUS-VALUE 215 At first sight it appears a strange proceeding, to equate the constant capital to zero. In Prussia it is 157. vi., p. Englishmen, always well up in the Bible, knew well enough that man, unless by elective grace a capitalist, or landlord, or sinecurist, is commanded to eat his bread in the sweat of his brow, but they did not know that he had to eat daily in his bread a certain quantity of human per- spiration mixed with the discharge of abscesses, cobwebs, dead black-beetles, and putrid German yeast, without counting alum, sand, and other agreeable mineral ingredients. But in actual practice, the process does not retain its normal form. 732,017 . To produce results so disadvantageous to the country generally, and to the factory workers in particular, several causes have co-operated, which, had circumstances permitted, we should have brought more prominent- ly under your notice; suffice it for the present to say that the most obvious one is the constant redundancy of labour, without which a trade so ruinous in its effects never could have been carried on, and which requires a constantly extending market to save it from annihilation. 119, 120.) 138 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION payments balance one another, money functions only ideally as money of account, as a measure of value. 163, note. As it excludes the concentration of these 762 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION means of production, so also it excludes co-operation, divi- sion of labour within each separate process of produc- tion, the control over, and the productive application of the forces of Nature by society, and the free develop- ment of the social productive powers. . In actual history it is notorious that conquest, enslavement, robbery, murder, briefly force, play the great part. Over-taxation is not an incident, but rather a principle. 2 It may be but a ruinous one-bedroomed hut, hav- 1 "The labourers' houses (in the open villages, which, of course, are always over-crowded) are usually in rows, built with their backs against the extreme edge of the plot of land which the builder could call his, and on this account are not allowed light and air, except from the front." (Dr. Hunter's Report, 1. 910.) "The notion of value contemplates the valuable article as a mere sym- EXCHANGE 91 it be declared that the social characters assumed by objects, or the material forms assumed by the social qualities of labour under the regime of a definite mode of production, are mere symbols, it is in the same breath also declared that these characteristics are arbitrary fictions sanctioned by the so-called universal consent of mankind. 122. Malthus, hugely astonished at his success, gave himself to stuffing into his book materials superficially compiled, and adding to it new matter, not discovered but annexed by him. "In the existing condition of the trade (the time of the cotton famine), it was greatly to the advantage of the operatives to work 12 hours per day, and make wages when they could." A bill to this effect had been brought in, "and it was mainly due to the action of the oper- ative bleachers in Scotland that the bill was abandoned " (Reports, &c, for 31st October, 1862, pp. If it was originally say 1 : 1, it now becomes succes- sively 2 : 1, 3 : 1, 4 : 1, 5 : 1, 7 : 1, &c, so that as the capital increases, instead of -~- of its total value, only 2 _ .^ , „ MJ 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , g , &c, is transformed into labour-power, and, on the other hand, , into means of production. MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OF COMMODITIES 123 sate each other, so that notwithstanding their continued insta- bility, the sum of the prices to be realised and the quantity of money in circulation remain constant; consequently, we find, especially if we take long periods into consideration, that the deviations from the average level, of the quantity of money current in any country, are much smaller than we should at first sight expect, apart of course from excessive perturbations periodically arising from industrial and commercial crises, or, less frequently, from fluctuations in the value of money. In order to tell us that its own value is created by labour in its abstract character of human labour, it says that the coat, in so far as it is worth as much as the linen, and therefore is value, consists of the same la- bour as the linen. 2 "Gh. Empl. The rent of the cottage is a part of the wages. c. In recent times the shepherd also has often been banished from these show-villages; e.g., near Market Harboro 'is a sheep-farm of about 500 acres, which only employs the labour of one man. They easily let them for £3 or £4 a-year, and paid a weekly wage of 9s. Nowadays he is lucky if it is furnished with a little garden, or if he may rent, far away from his cottage, a few roods. The diminution began with the famine year, 1846, so that Ireland, in less than twenty 5 years, lost more than nrths of its people. In all states of society, the labour-time that it costs to produce the means of subsistence, must necessarily be an object of interest to mankind, though not of equal interest in different stages of development. . Upon the arrival of quantities from Spain ... While the labourer, by virtue of his labour being of a specialised kind that has a special object, preserves and transfers to the product the value of the means of production, he at the same time, by the mere act of working, creates each instant an additional or new value. Its value is quantitatively expressed by the fact, that a definite quantity of B is exchangeable with a definite quantity of A. Mary Anne Walkley fell ill on the Friday, died on Sunday, without, to the astonishment of Madame Elise, having previously completed the work in hand. It remained unaltered until June, 1844. * Just as the offensive power of a squadron of cavalry, or the de- fensive power of a regiment of infantry, is essentially different from the sum of the offensive or defensive powers of the individual "Concours de forces." (Destutt de Tracy, 1. 68.) 2 Nevertheless, the manufacturing system, in many branches oi indus- try, attains this result but very imperfectly, because it knows not how to control with certainty the general chemical and physical conditions ol the process of production. In the open village, cottage-speculators buy scraps of land, which they throng as densely as they can with the cheap- est of all possible hovels. x., n. But still, even then, the intensity of labour would be different in different countries, and would modify the international application of the law of value. IV. . Not a single atom of the value of his old capital continues to exist. of cotton will absorb 12 hours' labour and be changed into 20 lbs. Told that she married the Queen's son. On the other hand, whipping and imprisonment for sturdy vagabonds. Nevertheless, they work in the last week of each month until 10, 11, 12, or 1 o'clock at night, along with the older labourers, in a very mixed company. 8 These figures are sufficient for comparison, but, taken absolutely, are false, since perhaps, £100,000,000 of income are annually not declared. It then becomes the general, socially pre- dominant form of production. Hence there is a great difference between the value of a machine, and the value transferred in a given time by that machine to the product. Despite all over-work, continued day and night, despite the most shameful under-payment of the workpeople, Russian manufacture manages to vegetate only by prohibition of foreign competition. Parce qu'on y met un prix." Therefore value is what a thing is worth, and the land has its "val- ue," because its value is "expressed in money." This is, anyhow, a very sim- ple way of explaining the why and the wherefore of things. They do increase or diminish by the same quantity. Persons of independent fortune . 118. If then we leave out of consideration the use-value of com- modities, they have only one common property left, that of being products of labour. 1 In wage-labour, on the contrary, even surplus-labour, or unpaid labour, appears as paid. . It is altogether impossible for a man who does so many things to do them all well. In those of the simplest form, the land is tilled in common, and the produce divided among the members. Petty, John Bellers, Andrew Yarranton, "The Advantages of the East India Trade," and J. This yard-measure, then, he applies to past, present, and future. xvi-xviii, n. No house had more than one bedroom, not one of them a back-door; water very scarce; weekly rent from Is. 4d. ii. See also III. The truth of the proposition that, "although gold and silver are not by Nature money, money is by Nature gold and silver," 1 is shown by the fitness of the physical properties of these metals for the functions of money. 1 Under this influence, each parish has a pecu- niary interest in reducing to a minimum the number of its resi- dent labourers: — for, unhappily, agricultural labour instead of implying a safe and permanent independence for the hard- working labourer and his family, implies for the most part only a longer or shorter circuit to eventual pauperism — a pauperism which, during the whole circuit, is so near, that any illness or temporary failure of occupation necessitates immediate recourse to parochial relief — and thus all residence of agricultural pop- ulation in a parish is glaringly an addition to its poor-rates .... Nevertheless, for the better compre- hension of the production of relative surplus-value, we may add the following remarks, in which we assume nothing more than the re- sults we have already obtained. A commodity is a use-value or object of utility, and a value. 705, 725.) III. c, t. Thereupon, The Times published on the 24th March, 1863, a letter from Ed- mund Potter, a former president of the Manchester Chamber of Commerce. Linguet overthrew Montes- quieu's illusory "Esprit des lois" with one word: "L'esprit des lois, c'est la propriete." 61Q CAPITALIST PRODUCTION property by various other means besides the exertion of labour. of Fact.," 30th April, 1863, 1. I., p. According to this, the surplus- labour of the English agricultural labourer is to his necessary labour as 3 : 1, which gives a rate of exploitation of 300%. He, himself, re- marks that he had collected these figures a few years ago, and that since that time the size of the factories and the number of spin- dles per labourer in England has increased. They furnish to the capitalist an exact measure for the in- tensity of labour. 28.) In English writers of the 17th century we frequently find "worth" in the sense of value in use, and "value" in the sense of exchange-value. In the winter we get a little sugar and water to our Indi- an meal. to 8— p. of linen = 20 yds. The gold is most- ly native, but disseminated throughout the quartz in minute quantities. See also numerous Instances in the "Reports of the Children's Employment Commission." 2 In 1861, in England and Wales, there were 94,665 sailors in the merchant service. living conscious thing, and labour is the manifestation of this power residing in him.) If therefore an article loses its utility, it also loses its value. The factory system carries the social division of la- bour immeasurably further than does manufacture, for it in- creases the productiveness of the industries it seizes upon, in a far higher degree. Eskrigge acquitted Robinson, and now was of opinion that what was right for Robinson was fair for Eskrigge. Piece-wages therefore lay the foundation of the modern "domestic labour," described above, as well as of a hierarchically organised system of exploitation and oppression. The first steel-pens were supplied by the handicraft system, in the year 1820, at 1 "Ch. Empl. INTENSITY OF LABOUR VARIABLE Increased intensity of labour means increased expenditure of labour in a given time. If therefore, as regards the use-values exchanged, both buyer and seller may possibly gain something, this is not the case as regards the exchange-values. m to 7 p. m., without any interval." 1 After these pleasant demonstrations, Capital preluded its revolt by a step which agreed with the letter of the law of 1844, and was therefore legal. The master can sell him, bequeath him, let him out on hire as a slave, just as any other personal chattel or cattle. The first distinction we notice between money that is money only, and money that is capital, is nothing more than a differ- ence in their form of circulation. ... . One example (it- has reference to the crisis in the Coventry silk weaving): "From information I have received from manufacturers as well as workmen, there seems to be no doubt that wages have been reduced to a greater extent than either the competition of the foreign producers, or other circumstances have rendered necessary . Why, how much worse is it than the intention of the Moguls, who, when they had bro- ken into the northern provinces of China, proposed in council to exterminate the inhabitants, and convert the land into pasture. English and French legislation run parallel and are identical in purport. the inspector has been down just once in the pit, and it has been going seven years. Merivale, formerly Professor of Political Economy at Oxford, subsequently employed in the English Colonial Office, "suppose that, on the occasion of some of these crises, the nation were to rouse itself to the effort of getting rid 634 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION by emigration of some hundreds of thousands of superfluous arms, what would be the consequence? lid., and that from this sum was deducted the rent of the house, the manufacturer, however, re- turning half the rent as a gift. Parliament passed 5 Labour Laws between 1802 and 1833, but was shrewd enough not to vote a penny for their car- rying out, for the requisite officials, &c. Accostare e separare sono gli unici elementi che l'ingegno umano ritrova analizzando l'idea della riproduzione: e tanto e riproduzione di valore (value in use, although Verri in this passage of his controversy with the Physiocrats is not himself quite certain of the kind of value he is speaking of) e di ricchezze se la terra, l'aria e l'acqua ne' campi si trasmutino in grano. a week, had had Is. taken off for a reduction in the rate of 10 per cent., and Is. 6d. Rep.," p. VALUE OP LABOUR-POWER AND WAGES 539 Let us next see how value (and price) of labour-power, pre- sent themselves in this transformed condition as wages. The burden of labour, like the rock, keeps ever falling back on the worn-out la- bourer." 2 At the same time that factory work exhausts the nervous mules to sweep the floor whilst the mules are in motion. The masters began their revolt with the sim- ple declaration that the sections of the Act of 1844 which pro- hibited the ad libitum use of young persons and women in such short fractions of the day of 15 hours as the employer chose, were "comparatively harmless" so long as the work-time was fixed at 12 hours. Formerly divided among a number of small producers, who cultivated it themselves and with their families spun it in retail fashion, it is now concen- trated in the hand of one capitalist, who sets others to spin and weave it for him. It is not enough that the conditions of labour are concen- trated in a mass, in the shape of capital, at the one pole of society, while at the other are grouped masses of men, who have noth- ing to sell but their labour-power. richesse en^productiohs, conver- ges en argent." (Mercier de la Riviere, 1. c. Therefore -7= go jq*' qa giving a rate of surplus-value of more than 100%. The numberless shades, that it at first sight presents, correspond to the intermediate stages lying between these two extremes. 81.) The Observer, a semi-official government organ, contained the following paragraph on 24th April, 1864: "Some very curious rumours are current of the means which have been resorted to in order to create a scarcity of bank-notes.... 252 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION In the years 1858-60, the journeymen bakers in Ireland organised at their own expense great meetings to agitate against night and Sunday work. As a matter of fact, the money in reality represents the quantity or sum of gold ideally expressed beforehand by the sum of the prices of the commodities. Nay, there is often not even need of one complete trade, but one man makes shoes for men, another for women. Their children, when opium does not give them the finishing stroke, are born recruits of the gang. . Just as every art that is not a means to an end, but an end in itself, has no limit to its aims, because it seeks con- stantly to approach nearer and nearer to that end, while those arts that pur- sue means to an end, are not boundless, since the goal itself imposes a limit upon them, so with Chrematistic, there are no bounds to its aims, these aims being absolute wealth. lxvii., n. Smith, 1. It towered up as an econom- ic work of art, on the broad foundation of the town handi- crafts, and of the rural domestic industries. 5 1. The fact that a number of sales take place simultaneously, and side by side, limits the extent to which coin can be replaced by the rapidity of currency. — That was the prelude to the crisis which broke out immediately afterwards. 2 [Note added in the 3rd German edition.— The author resorts here to the economic language in current use. And would not such a history be easier to compile, since, as Vico says, human history differs from natural history in this, that we have made the. In the early stages of the circulation of commodities, it is the surplus use-values alone that are converted into money. Coins of the same denomination become different in value, because they are different in weight. 1 First let us consider this transaction from the standpoint of the individual capitalist. c, p. It is not till the 5th Book, on the Revenue of the State, that he reproduces Ferguson. Even God Almighty does not escape this fate. This in turn is the basis of an extended scale of produc- tion, of the methods for raising the productive power of labour that accompany it, and of accelerated production of surplus-value. Thus in the old- est caves we find stone implements and weapons. If we had been sure of retaining the labour of such emigrants, we should have been glad to have engaged it at once, and for a high price: and we should have engaged it, even though we had been sure it would leave us, provided we had been sure of a fresh supply whenever we might need it." 2 After Wakefield has contrasted the English capitalist agri- culture and its "combined" labour with the scattered cultivation of American peasants, he unwittingly gives us a glimpse at the reverse of the medal. A further difficulty is caused by the original form of the variable capital. From the very outset it pre-supposes even a difference between their use-values and it has nothing whatever to do with their consump- tion, which only begins after the deal is closed and executed. 2 M— C, a purchase, is, at the same time, C— M, a sale; the con- cluding metamorphosis of one commodity is the first metamor- phosis of another. The accumulation and stor- age of skilled labour, that most important operation, is, as regards the great mass of labourers, accomplished without any capital whatever." (Th. Hodg- skin: "Labour Defended, &c, " p. "The increase of labourers is general- ly greatest, since 1851, in such branches of industry in which machinery has not up to the present been employed with success." (Census of England and Wales for 1861. First report, etc., 1863. produces a mass of surplus-value of 3s., or the labourer supplies daily a mass of surplus-labour equal to 6 hours. to 2s. Slept on the floor of the furnace, over head, with an apron under me, and a bit of a jacket over me. xi, p. Be- fore he can apply this leisure time productively for himself, a whole series of historical events is required; before he spends it in surplus-labour for strangers, compulsion is necessary. From Dr. Harvey, of St. George's Hospital, who, on private professional business, visited Wing during the time of the epidemic, I re- ceived information exactly in the sense of the above report. "Pecunias vero nulli einere fas erit, nam in usu publico constitutas oportet non esse mercem." Some good work on this question has been done by G. 460 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION co-operation, over 48,000 needles a-day. 370. A comparison of it with the said Swiss federal law is of particular interest because it clearly demonstrates the merits and demerits of the two legislative methods— the English, "historical" method, which in- tervenes when occasion requires, and the continental method, which is built up on the traditions of the French Revolution and generalises more. Under these circum- stances, each article costs one shilling: sixpence for the value of the means of production, and sixpence for the value newly added in working with those means. For the labour that creates it, now stands expressly revealed, as labour that ranks equally with every other sort of human labour, no matter what its form, wheth- er tailoring, ploughing, mining, &c, and no matter, therefore, whether it is realised in coats, corn, iron, or gold. To the purchaser of a commodity belongs its use, and the seller of labour-power, by giving his labour, does no more, in reality, than part with the use-value that he has sold. xiii.) 1 "Where the work in any trade is paid for by the piece at so much per job ... Jones: "An Essay on the Distribution of Wealth," part I. Engels: "The English Ten Hours' Bill." (In the "iNeue Rheinische Zeitung, Politisch-cekonomische Revue." Edited by K. Whether complex or simple, each operation has to be done by hand, retains the character of a handicraft, and is therefore dependent on the strength, skill, quickness, and sureness, of the individual work- man in handling his tools. But now comes that revival of trade which the mildly liberal Mr. Forster, the negro's friend, recently crowed over with so much grace. m., including -j an hour for breakfast, and an hour for dinner, and thus leaving 10 y working-hours, and 8 hours for Saturday, from 6 a. 1042.) In the year 1865 there were 3,217 coal mines in Great Brit- ain, and 12 inspectors. Like all other laws it is modified in its working by many circumstances, the analysis of which does not concern us here. Since handicraft skill is the foundation of manufacture, and since the mechanism of manufacture as a whole possesses no framework, apart from the labourers themselves, capital is constantly com- pelled to wrestle with the insubordination of the workmen. The Workshops' Regulation Act, wretched in all its details, remained a dead letter in the hands of the municipal and local authorities who were charged with its execution. of yarn, care must be taken that no more than this weight of cotton is consumed in the production of 1 lb. Since every article produced by a machine is cheaper than a similar article produced by hand, we deduce the following infallible law: If the total quantity of the article produced by machinery, be equal to the to- tal quantity of the article previously produced by a handicraft or by manufacture, and now made by machinery, then the total labour expended is diminished. The legal day's work for some kinds of agri- cultural labour is interpretable in such a way that the day begins in May and ends in October. Barbon; 1. In these tribunals, the masters sat in judgment on themselves. The other part he lays out in living labour-power. Engels, 1. Although it adapts the detail oper- ations to the various degrees of maturity, strength, and develop- ment of the living instruments of labour, thus conducing to ex- ploitation of women and children, yet this tendency as a whole is wrecked on the habits and the resistance of the male labourers. As soon as magnitude of value is converted into price, the above necessary relation takes the shape of a more or less accidental exchange-ratio between a single commodity and another, the money-commodity. All combinations, contracts, oaths, &c, by which masons and carpenters reciprocally bound them- selves, were declared null and void. A commodity strips off its original commodity- form on being alienated, i.e., on the instant its use-value actually attracts the gold, that before existed only ideally in its price. But to be equated to linen, and again to iron, is to be as different as are linen and iron. The labourer consumes in a two-fold way. 2 These fetters vanished with the dissolution of feudal society, with the expropriation and partial eviction of the country population. THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 675 good by the parish, £18 6s. the intrinsick value, regarded in these metals, is nothing but the quantity." ("Some Considerations," &c, 1691, Works Ed. 1777, vol. 50. Whether this latter result is the consequence of accumulation or centralisation, whether centralisation is accomplished by the violent method of annexation — when certain capitals become such preponderant centres of attraction for others that they shat- ter the individual cohesion of the latter and then draw the sep- arate fragments to themselves — or whether the fusion of a num- ber of capitals already formed or in process of formation takes place by the smoother process of organising joint-stock compa- nies — the economic effect remains the same. This change in piece-wage, so far 1 "A Defence of the Landowners and Farmers of Great Britain," 1814, PP 4, 5. of Fact., 31 st Oct., 1865.) 3 With blast furnaces, for instance, "work towards the end of the week being generally much increased in duration in consequence of the habit of the men of idling on Monday and occasionally during a part or the whole of Tuesday also." ("Child. Bankers' and Merchants' Bills payable after date, £302,674 Bills payable after Cheques on London Bank- date, £533,596 ers 663,672 Cheques on Bankers, &c, Bank of England Notes, 22,743 payable on demand, 357,715 Gold, 9,427 Country Notes, 9,627 Silver and Copper, . First, when manu- facturers were obliged to work hard for their livelihood." They enriched themselves chiefly by robbing the parents, whose chil- dren were bound as apprentices to them: the parents paid a high premium, while the apprentices were starved. . Where things are tending to the above result, often the cottages which stand, testify, in their un- repaired and wretched condition, to the extinction to which they are doomed. 66, n. xxxi.) MACHINERY AND MQDERN INDUSTRY 479 shudder to go further." 1 "They are curious men," said one of the witnesses, a shoemaker, speaking of the masters, "they think it does a boy no harm to work too hard for half the year, if he is nearly idle for the other half." 2 In the same way as technical impediments, so, too, those "usages which have grown with the growth of trade" were and still are proclaimed by interested capitalists as obstacles due to the nature of the work. And even should they find employment, what a poor look-out is theirs! Crippled as they are by division of labour, these poor devils are worth so little outside their old trade, that they cannot find admission into any industries, except a few of inferior kind, that are over-supplied with underpaid work- men. 713 PART Mil THE SO-CALLED PRIMITIVE ACCUMULATION CHAPTER XXVI THE SECRET OF PRIMITIVE ACCUMULATION We have seen how money is changed into capital; how through capital surplus-value is made, and from sur- plus-value more capital. Every large town may be looked upon as a place of human sacrifice, a shrine where thousands pass yearly' through the fire as offerings to the moloch of avarice." S. The form of direct barter is x use-value A= y use-value B. About 1630, a wind-sawmill, erected near London by a Dutchman, succumbed to the excesses of the populace. 2 Thomas Stamford Raffles, late Lieut. c. Before that, they had always suffered from a deficient supply of yarn." (Gaskell, 1. 4 I. It must be remembered that it is of the highest importance to manu- facturers that their machinery should be in motion, i.e., producing yarns and goods. I give below a summary of the result. The elementary expression of the relative value of a single commodity, such as linen, in terms of the commodity, such as gold, that plays the part of money, is the price-form of that com- modity. The erroneous opinion that it is, on the contrary, prices that are determined by the quantity of the circulating medium, and that the latter depends on the quantity of the precious 1 "There is a certain measure and proportion of money requisite to drive the trade of a nation, more or less than which would prejudice the same. 124, 129. One single envelope machine now performs all these operations at once, and makes more than 3,000 envelopes in an hour. Besides the general pe- riodic changes of the industrial cycle, and the special fluctuations in the markets to which each industry is subject, we may also reckon what is called "the season," dependent either on the peri- odicity of favourable seasons of the year for navigation; or on fashion, and the sudden placing of large orders that have to be exe- cuted in the shortest possible time. In many manu- factures, however, the group itself is an organised body of labour, the total mechanism being a repetition or multiplication of these elementary organisms. There the process is distin- guished by its systematic character, by the magnitude of the scale on which it is carried out at one blow (in Ireland landlords have gone to the length of sweeping away several villages at once; in Scotland areas as large as German principalities are dealt with), finally by the peculiar form of property, under which the embez- zled lands were held. 460.) We here see how India and China avenged themselves on England. undoubtedly had the effect of throwing a very large number of men out of work. Corn, for example, is a raw material for millers, starch-manu- facturers, distillers, and cattle-breeders. Suppose, e.g., a part of the West- phalian peasants, who, at the time of Frederick II., all span flax, forcibly expropriated and hunted from the soil; and the other part that remained, turned into day-labourers of large farmers. It is in tropical cul- ture, where annual profits often equal the whole capital of planta- tions, that negro life is most recklessly sacrificed. But very soon an im- portant change takes place. I will give a few specimens culled from a dozen counties. As was shown by an official medical inquiry in the year 1861, the high death-rates are, apart from local causes, principally due to the employment of the mothers away from their homes, and to the neglect and maltreatment, consequent on her absence, such as, amongst others, insufficient nourishment, unsuitable food, and dosing with opiates; besides this, there arises an unnatural estrangement between mother and child, and as a consequence intentional starving and poisoning of the children. The concluding part of the report is as follows: — "The Committee has carefully examined his proposal and finds that it is entirely in favour of the merchants, and that no advantage will result to the crown." ("Arbeiten der Kaiserlich Russischen Gesandtschaft zu Peking iiber China." Aus dem Russischen von Dr. K Abel und F. 3 (D. var.-|-3s. It comprises a series of forcible methods, of which we have passed in review only those that have been epoch-making as meth- ods of the primitive accumulation of capital. Let the mass of the surplus-value be S, the surplus-value supplied by the individual labourer in the average day s, the variable capital daily advanced in the purchase of one individual labour-power v, the sum total of the variable capital V, the val- ue of an average labour-power P, its degree of exploitation — / surp us- a our \ an j t ^ e number of labourers employed n; \ necessary labour/ r J we have: It is always supposed, not only that the value of an average labour-power is constant, but that the labourers employed by a capitalist are reduced to average labourers. salted and dried to the texture of mahogany, and hardly worth the difficult process of assimilation ... Several attempts to apply the principles of the Factory Acts, but in a modified form, to agriculture have been made, but have so far resulted in complete failure. does not exist only in theory. They lose two or three days, and then work all night to make it up.... An English and a Chinese spinner, e.g., may work the same number of hours with the same intensity; then they will both 606 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION in a week create equal values. In order to charm out of his bosom the awful conflict between the desire for enjoyment and the chase after riches, Malthus, about the year 1820, advocated a division of la- bour, which assigns to the capitalist actually engaged in produc- tion, the business of accumulating, and to the other sharers in surplus-value, to the landlords, the place-men, the beneficed clergy, &c, the business of spending. (7) Farms over 100 acres. The changes in the material mode of production, and the corresponding changes in the social relations of the producers 1 gave rise first to an extravagance beyond all bounds, and then in opposition to this, called forth a control on the part of Society which legally limits, regulates, and makes uniform the working-day and its pauses. No poison kills vermin with more cer- tainty than the Factory Act removes such everlasting barriers. As the number of the co-operating labourers increases, so too does their resistance to the domination of capital, and with it, the necessity for capital to overcome this resistance by counter- pressure. 892 . . 6d. const. They amount to the most serious damage to the mill-owner's prospects and proper- ty. A large part of the national product, changed later into a fund of capitalist accumulation, then still entered into the consumption- fund of the labourer. 1858 1861 1868 England and Wales 341,170 407,593 357,052 Scotland 34,698 41,237 39,809 Ireland 3,345 2,734 4,203 United Kingdom .... And while the sum of them is of terrible magnitude against life, the mere scantiness of food is in itself of very serious moment These are painful reflections, especially when it is remembered that the poverty to which they advert is not the deserved poverty of idleness. 298 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION SECTION 7.— THE STRUGGLE FOR THE NORMAL WORKING-DAY. .... 21.) Because the commodity that serves as money is ca- pable of being replaced in circulation by mere symbols of value, therefore its functions as a measure of value and a standard of prices are declared to be superfluous! 1 From the fact that gold and silver, so far as they are coins, or exclu- sively serve as the medium of circulation, become mere tokens of themselves, Nicholas Barbon deduces the right of Governments 'to raise money," that is, to give to the weight of silver that is called a shilling the name of a greater weight, such as a crown; and so to pay creditors shillings, instead of crowns "Money does wear and grow lighter by often telling over... 1 .... Lord Dufferin demands a new blood-letting of one-third of a million only, instead of about two millions; in fact, without the getting rid of these, the millennium in Erin is not to be. 295.) "If you obtained your wish in getting an inferior class of inspectors appointed, do you think that there would be no danger from want of skill, &c?" "I think not, I think that the Govern- ment would see after that, and have proper men in that position." 502 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION (n. The labour of the 12 hours' working-day is represented by the remaining 9— articles. The money famine continues, whether payments have to be made in gold or in credit money such as bank-notes. The new machine hands are exclusively girls and young women. Of all the great motors handed down from the manufacturing period, horse-power is the worst, partly because a horse has a head of his own, partly be- cause he is costly, and the extent to which he is applicable in factories is very restricted. At this stage, therefore, the articles exchanged do not acquire a value-form independent of their own use-value, or of the individ- ual needs of the exchangers. Modern Industry never looks upon and treats the existing form of a process as final. The nominal prices of commodities would rise, but the real re- lation between their values would remain unchanged. In the course of time, therefore, some portion at least of the products of labour must be produced with a special view to exchange. 8 Of these, 137,447 males. It incessantly forces him to sell his labour-power in order to live, and enables the capitalist to purchase labour-power in or- der that he may enrich himself. As cap- italist, I buy commodities from A and sell them again to B, but as a simple owner of commodities, I sell them to B and then purchase fresh ones from A. a "Reports, &c, ior 31st Oct., 1846, " p. He has to share it with cap- italists, with landowners, &c, who fulfil other functions in the complex of social production. L. Of the six small masters, one would therefore squeeze out more than the average rate of surplus-value, another less. By a decree of June 14, 1791, they declared all coalition of the workers as "an attempt against liberty and the declaration of the rights of man," punishable by a fine of 500 livres, together with deprivation of the rights of an active citizen for one year. That is not the way to get rich or to create surplus- value. 8 and 13. c, Voi I., i. Here competition rages in direct proportion to the number, and in inverse proportion to the magnitudes, of the an- tagonistic capitals. 2, c. April number, 1850, p. Yet in this point of view, there is, in my opinion, a very important sanitary context to be added. . 2 It is thus that the pound sterling in English denotes less than one- third of its original weight; the pound Scot, before the union, only l-36th; the French livre, l-74th; the Spanish maravedi, less than 1-1, 000th; and the Portuguese rei a still smaller fraction. &c," p. It is true that if the weaver, after buying the Bible, sell more linen, money comes back into his hands. The only result would be that each of them would represent twice as many use-values as before; these use-values being twice as cheap as before. What, ex- claimed one of their spokesmen, a disciple of Ricardo, Mr. Malthus preaches high rents, heavy taxes, &c, so that the pressure of the spur may constantly be kept on the industrious by unproduc- tive consumers! By all means, production, production on a con- stantly increasing scale, runs the shibboleth; but "production will, 1 Dr. Aikin: "Description of the Country from 30 to 40 miles round Man- chester." Lond., 1795, p. The cry was so urgent that Mr. H. There was, however, an important fact which prevented Aristotle from seeing that, to attribute value to commodities, is 60 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION merely a mode of expressing all labour as equal human labour, and consequently as labour of equal quality. At the same time, it caused and stimulated increased reproduction of wool. On the other hand, the peculiar nature of the commodity sold implies a limit to its consumption by the purchaser, and the labourer maintains his right as seller when he wishes to reduce the working-day to one of definite normal dura- tion. c, vol. Or else he receives for 12 hours' labour less than 6s., i.e., less than 12 hours' labour. c, p. . Emp. Cyclops the forbidding of the night- labour of children and young persons "would be impossible, it would be tantamount to stopping their works," and yet their 1. 3 All this happened without the slightest observation of 1 "A Letter to Sir T. Hence the comparatively rapid advance since 1860. If, for instance, we have yj^— ^-. Dr. Ure, the Pindar of the automatic factory, describes it, on the one hand as "Combined co-operation of many orders of work- people, adult and young, in tending with assiduous skill, a system of productive machines, continuously impelled by a central power" the prime mover); on the other hand, as "a vast automaton, corn- Quantity Exported, 1848. 1 Let us take a peasant liable to do compulsory service for his lord. "What care our great encroachers?" The dwellings of the peasants and the cottages of the labourers were razed to the ground or doomed to decay. Rep.," p. On the other hand, if the hours of working were reduced by one hour per day (prices remaining the same), the net profit would be destroyed— if they were reduced by one hour and a half, even the gross profit would be destroyed." 1 And the professor calls this an "analysis!" If, giving cre- dence to the out-cries of the manufacturers, he believed that the workmen spend the best part of the day in the production, i.e., the reproduction or replacement of the value of the build- ings, machinery, cotton, coal, &c, then his analysis was super- fluous. There are, be- sides, all the various industries that supply the cattle-breeder, the tanner, and the shoemaker with the means of production. One and the same product may therefore serve as raw material in very different processes. Though the Factory Act, that first and meagre concession wrung from capital, is limited to combining elementary education with work in the factory, there can be no doubt that when the working-class comes into power, as inevitably it must, technical instruction, both theoretical and practical, will take its proper place in the working-class schools. Now, let us cast a glance at certain branches of production in which the exploita- tion of labour is either free from fetters to this day, or was so yesterday. 1 And, in fact, their supposition appears the only one consonant with the laws of the production of commodities. They are forms of thought expressing with social validity the conditions and relations of a definite, historically determined mode of production, viz., the production of commodities. Constant revolution in production, uninterrupted disturb- ance of all social conditions, everlasting uncertainty and agitation, distin- guish the bourgeois epoch from all earlier ones. But with this, the extent of the working-day itself is not yet given. . . Historically, however, this form is developed in opposition to peasant agriculture and to the carry- ing on of independent handicrafts whether in guilds or not. 95, 96.) 2 "Money ... It explains only why his necessary labour-time would be limited to one day a week. It will be sufficient to indicate the most simple of these conditions. Why don't you ask further, where are the independent weavers, spinners, and artisans gone? Despite all this Mr. Redgrave says: "This kind of labour, however, would only be sought after when none other could be pro- cured, for it is a high-priced labour The ordinary wages of a boy of 13 would be about 4s. He was talking with some capitalists of Canada and the state of New York, where the immigrant wave often becomes stagnant and deposits a sediment of "supernumerary" labourers. Expressed in gold, the labour of five days is thirty shillings. The transaction is veiled by the commodity-form of the product and the money-form of the commodity. "It is a melancholy thing to stand alone in one's country," said Lord Leicester, when complimented on the com- pletion of Hookham. 43,366 2,434 3 1 "Public Health, Sixth Report," 1864, pp. And it is under this form, that the English government purchases opium from the ryots of India.... Her technical means for saving labour are colossal. 281: "And thinking itself, in this age of separations, may become a peculiar craft." DIVISION OP LABOUR AND MANUFACTURE 363 nounced and decided in proportion as society (he rightly uses this word, for capital, landed property and their State) becomes richer. Sect. When Sir R. The first condition of accumulation is that the capitalist must have contrived to sell his commodities, and to reconvert into cap- ital the greater part of the money so received. In one, a married couple, 3 grown-up sons, 1 grown-up daughter, 4 children — in all 10; in another, 3 adults, 6 children. Trj$ 7iXeove$ta<; dva$eiv ix xuiv |iuxu>v tyj<; *f"?i<; a-JTov tov IUoutcova" (Athen. . Hence all the circumstances that determine the mass of surplus-value, operate to determine the magnitude of the accumu- lation. . . Morton read before the Society of Arts a paper on "The forces employed in agriculture." He there states: "Every improvement that furthers the uniformity of the land makes the steam- engine more and more applicable to the production of pure mechanical force... The price of the yarn is 12-^- d. Piece-wages do not, in fact dis- tinctly express any relation of value. c, p. 8 In winter, from 7 a. 116. 8 On the other hand, the rapid advance of English industry between 1848 and the present time, under the influence of a day of 10 hours, surpasses the advance made between 1833 and 1847, when the day was 12 hours long, by far more than the latter surpasses the advance made during the half century after the first introduction of the factory system, when the working-day was without limits. of cotton absorbed six hours' labour, and became 10 lbs. 167 CHAPTER VI THE BUYING AND SELLING OF LABOUR-POWER THe change of value that occurs in the case of money intended to be converted into capital, cannot take place in the money itself, since in its function of means of purchase and of payment, it does no more than realise the price of the commodity it buys or pays for; and, as hard cash, it is value petrified, never varying. A Letter to Lord John Russell." Lond., 1821.) 3 "Capital, with compound interest on every portion of capital saved, is so all engrossing that all the wealth in the world from which income is derived, has long ago become the interest on capital." (London, Economist, 19th July, 1859.) 4 "No political economist of the present day can by saving mean mere hoarding: and beyond this contracted and insufficient proceeding, no use of the term in reference to the national wealth can well be imagined, but CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO CAPITAL 589 wealth is either wealth that is rescued from being destroyed in its existing form, i.e., from being consumed, or wealth that is with- drawn from circulation. The demand for wage-labour grew, therefore, rapidly with every accumulation of capital, whilst the supply of wage-labour followed but slowly. And for what is the gold exchanged? From 1851 to 1871, the farms under 20 acres fell by more than 900 in number; those between 50 and 75 acres fell from 8,253 to 6,370; the same thing occurred with all other farms under 100 acres. A remark of Mr. Redgrave to be quoted directly seems strange, especially if we consider that even among the years of prosperity of the English cotton trade, the year 1860 stands un- paralleled, and that, besides, wages were exceptionally high For this ex- traordinary demand for work had to contend with the depopulation of Ireland, with unexampled emigration from the English and Scotch agricul- tural districts to Australia and America, with an actual diminution of the population in some of the English agricultural districts, in consequence partly of an actual breakdown of the vital force of the labourers, partly of the already effected dispersion of the disposable population through the dealers in human flesh. Still, 8 George II. The purchaser of labour-power consumes it by setting the seller of it to work. 1,836,310 No. 136,578 Acres. There are always too many agricultural labourers for the ordinary, and always too few for the exceptional or tem- porary needs of the cultivation of the soil. Peto, was in ttie odour of sanctity. The 6,000 acres had until this time lain waste, and brought in no income to their owners. 1866," p. II., p. 3 1. La Chaux-de-Fond alone, which we may look upon as a huge watch manufactory, produces yearly twice as many as Geneva. "At present, all the wealth of society goes first into the pos- session of the capitalist ... The quality of the labour is here controlled by the work it- self, which must be of average perfection if the piece-price is to be paid in full. lb. Those who are not lodged in this way re- ceive in compensation £4 per annum. The most striking proof of this is afforded by the relays system, put into operation by the manufacturers during their revolt from 1848-1850. The English "ateliers na- tionaux" ofl862 and the following years, established for the benefit of the des- titute cotton operatives, differ from the French of 1848 in this, that in the latter the workmen had to do unproductive work at the expense of the state, in the former they had to do productive municipal work to the advantage of the bourgeois, and that, too, cheaper than the regular workmen, with whom they were thus thrown into competition. The capabilities of the tool are eman- cipated from the restraints that are inseparable from human la- bour-power. 5.) 1 "You take my life When you do take the means whereby 1 live." Shakespeare. 4 by 6 ft. 1 Savages and half-civilised races use the tongue differently. "Of those who share the national income among themselves, the one side (the workers) acquire every year a fresh right to their share by fresh work; the others (the capitalists) have already acquired, by work done orig- inally, a permanent right to their share" (Sismondi, I. 2 "Accumulation of stocks ... 1858 1861 1868 England and Wales 25,818,576 28,352,152 30,478,228 Scotland 2,041,129 1,915,398 1,397,546 Ireland 150,512 119,944 124,240 United Kingdom .... . (8) Total area. 280, 277.) "Do you not think that the effect of having these inspectors examining the collieries so frequently would be to shift the re- sponsibility (!) of supplying proper ventilation from the owners of the collieries to the Government officials?" "No, I do not think that, I think that they should make it their business to enforce the Acts which are already in existence." (n. Dublin, 1770, v. m. Bibl. of coffee = [» 2 ounces of gold 1 qr. 20.) MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 381 from one phase to another is effected, not by the hand of man, but by the machinery itself. 5, 11. 1 The object is carried over the same distance in a short- er time. 5 The "Public Health Report," where in dealing with the subject of children's mortality, the gang-system is treated in passing, remains un- known to the press, and, therefore, to the English public. Whenever he discusses the productiveness of labour, he seeks in it, not the cause of surplus-value, but the 1 "Chaque travail doit (this appears also to be part of the droits et de- voirs du citoyen) laisser un excedant." Proudhon. His most celebrated saying, "On n'achete des produits qu'avec des produits" (1. 52 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION new father of the people, changes its features, hair, and many other things besides. Then the Bible falls out of circulation, and again money takes its place. Although the gang-master, who, in some districts is called "the driver," is armed with a long stick, he uses it but seldom, and complaints of brutal treatment are exceptional. . This maximum limit is conditioned by two things. THE WORKING-DAY 289 against mill-owners for a breach of the letter of the Act, or for employment of young persons by relays in cases in which there is no reason to believe that such young persons have been actually employed for a longer period than that sanctioned by law." Hereupon, Factory Inspector J. 1845," praises Bar- bon for this anticipation, but prudently passes over the naive forms, in which Barbon clothes the absurd supposition on which the "currency principle" is based. Hence, in the value equation, in which the coat is the equiva- lent of the linen, the coat officiates as the form of value. W. 15, 16.) Compare Quetelet on the average individual. . c, pp. MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 481 an opposition that throws a fresh and glaring light on the Free- trade dogma, according to which, in a society with conflicting interests, each individual necessarily furthers the common weal by seeking nothing but his own personal advantage! One example is enough. . Not at all. Compositor Agricultural labourer . or Is., and there is the wear of the tools, the cosl. But out of the death of slavery a new life at once arose. Its use-value becomes distinguished from its exchange- value. Hence in 1864, when the Commission had not yet published more than a part of its reports, the earthenware industries (including the potteries), makers of paper-hangings, matches, cartridges, and caps, and fustian cutters were made subject to the Acts in force in the textile industries. . Com., I. Modern fiscality, whose pivot is formed by taxes on the most necessary means of subsistence (thereby increasing their price), thus contains within itself the germ of automatic progression. recognised by both employer and employed as the standard of w 7 ages for the general run of workmen in the trade." (Dunning, 1. It will be seen later that the labour expended during the so-called normal day is paid below its value, so that the over-time is simply a capitalist trick in order to extort more surplus-labour, which it would still be, even if the labour-power expend- ed during the normal working-day were properly paid. What the latter really says is, that on the one hand all things which constitute wealth represent the labour that creates them, but that on the other hand, they acquire their "two different values" (use-value and exchange-value) from "the value of labour." He thus falls into the commonplace error of the vulgar economists, who assume the value of one commodity (in this case labour) in order to determine the values of the rest. It would ei- ther be not saleable at all, or only at something below the average value of labour-power. The papists do ours a great service, in that they don't drown, burn, murder all of them, or let them all rot in prison; but let some live, and only drive them out, or take from them what they have. 479.) a See "Report of the Social Science Congress, at Edinburgh." Oct., 1863. The connexion between the paid and the unpaid labour is destroyed. The first effect of shortening the working-day results from the self-evident law, that the efficiency of labour-power is in an inverse ratio to the duration of its expenditure. So the usurer would deceive the world, as though he were of use and gave the world oxen, which he, however, rends, and eats all alone... The collective labourer, with one set of his many hands armed with one kind of tools, draws the wire, with another set, armed with different tools, he at the same time, straightens it, with another, he cuts it, with another, points it, and so on. The expansion of value, which is the objective basis or main-spring of the circulation M — C — M, becomes his subjec- tive aim, and it is only in so far as the appropriation of ever more and more wealth in the abstract becomes the sole motive of his operations, that he functions as a capitalist, that is, as capital personified and endowed with consciousness and a will. But it does not prevent (this Ricardo overlooks in certain conclusions he draws) a million men with different powers of productivity in their labour, turning into products very different masses of the means of production, and therefore preserving in their products very different masses of value; in consequence of which the values of the prod- ucts yielded may vary considerably. I., pp. The so- called Emperor Maximilian re-established it by a decree, which, in the House of Representatives at Washington, was aptly denounced as a decree for the re-introduction of slavery into Mexico. The favourite method of treating the working-day as con- stant in magnitude became, through the use of the formulae II., a fixed usage, because in them surplus-labour is always compared with a working-day of given length. It contains the wretchedest cots to be found anywhere. 2 It is true that the popular mind is impressed by the sight, on the one hand, of the mass of goods that are stored up for grad- ual consumption by the rich, 8 and on the other hand, by the for- mation of reserve stocks; the latter, a phenomenon that is common to all modes of production, and on which we shall dwell for a mo- ment, when we come to analyse circulation. The Factory Act (1864) made the saving of time a necessity, and so forced into existence a dipping machine, the vapour from which could not come in contact with the workers. But for a full elucidation of the law of accumulation, his condition outside the workshop must also be looked at, his condition as to food and dwelling. Moreover, since, they inherit from their forefathers numerous rules, they are eager to discover fresh advantages." (Diodorus Siculus: Bibl. for it. We also saw that at first, the subjection of labour to capital was only a formal result of the fact, that the labourer, instead of working for himself, works for and consequently under the capital- ist. The same state of things went on quietly until "the Swing riots, in 1830, revealed to us (i.e., the ruling classes) by the light of blazing corn-stacks, that misery and black mutinous discontent smouldered quite as fiercely under the surface of agricultural as of manufacturing England." 3 At this time, Sad- ler, in the House of Commons, christened the agricultural labour- ers "white slaves," and a Bishop echoed the epithet in the Upper House. "Factory education is compulsory, and it is a condition of labour." ("Rep. He still works in his old handicraft-like way. . 34. Now let some one capitalist contrive to double the productiveness of labour, and to produce in the work- 1 "Let us suppose ... 20. This equalisation of unequal quantities not merely does away with the determination of value. Since 12 working-hours of the spinner are embodied in 6s., it follows that in yarn of the value of 30s., there must be em- bodied 60 working-hours. The last process of wholesale expropriation of the agricul- tural population from the soil is, finally, the so-called clearing of estates, i.e., the sweeping men off them. Males 45,155 44,446 Females 52,459 52,955 97.614 97,401 Dr. Hunter's Report in "Public Health, Seventh Report. 188, 189.) 2 "Ces speculatcurs si economes du travail des ouvriers qu'il faudrait qu'ils payassent." (J.N. Bidaut: "Du Monopole qui s'etablit dans les arts industriels et le commerce." Paris, 1828, p. 294.) "Do you merely want more inspectors, or do you want a lower class of men as an inspector?" "A man who would knock about, and see that things are kept right; a man who would not be afraid of himself." (n. Suppose a spinner to have advanced a capital of £10,000, of which four-fifths (£8,000) are laid out in cotton, machinery, &c, and one-fifth (£2,000) in wages. The fibre being so short, a great 1 "Rep. After 1833, the extension of the Asiatic markets is enforced by "destruction of the human 1 1. These gentlemen consider lO-^- hours of labour as the normal working- day which includes ot course the normal surplus-labour. 137.) A member of the rural police who had for many years been a de- tective in the worst quarters of London, says of the girls of his village: "their boldness and shamelessness I never saw equalled during some years of police life and detective duty in the worst parts of London They live like pigs, great boys and girls, mothers and fathers, all sleeping in one room, in many instances." ("Child. 1 This boundless greed after riches, this pas- sionate chase after exchange-value, 2 is common to the capitalist and the miser; but while the miser is merely a capitalist gone mad, the capitalist is a rational miser. 2,210 2,887 2,549 1 "Rep. c, ii, p. mind that the development of the latter is only the expres- sion and result of the development of the former. On the other hand, the form of this movement precludes a circuit from being made by the money. will sow his wheat, for instance, and allow it to remain a twelvemonth in the ground, or leave his wine in a cellar for years, instead of consuming these things or their equivalent at once ... From little occupiers of land, they are reduced to the state of day-labourers and hirelings; and, at the same time, their subsistence in that state has become more difficult." 4 In fact, 1 Rev. c.) "Une valeur en productions n'a fait que changer de forme." (Id., p. Messrs. 2 This distinction between division of labour in society and in manu- facture, was practically illustrated to the Yankees. But behind this apparent rise, is hidden an actual fall in wages, for it does not correspond at all to the rise in price of the necessary means of subsistence that has taken place in the meantime. 58 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION expression of value, such as 20 yds. It is not the labour, but the instrument of labour, that serves as the starting-point of the machine. 1 At all events the Committee had directed the attention of the public to its "daily bread," and therefore to the baking trade. 171, n. capital than their production costs." 4 In relation to circulation, producers and consumers meet only as buyers and sellers. 1 But, however that may be, it is clear, that the col- lective working-day of a large number of workmen simultaneously employed, divided by the number of these workmen, gives one day of average social labour. DIVISION OP LABOUR AND MANUFACTURE 337 By degrees, it becomes the splitting up of carriage-making int© its various detail processes, each of which crystallises into the ex- clusive function of a particular workman, the manufacture, as a whole, being carried on by the men in conjunction. * The conditions of its sale, whether the whole, Doctor, your meaning is good; but I think you will not succeed this time. II., pp. This fall is due, besides other causes, to the increase in lighting by gas. 53 and 7. c, ch. 6d. "It is no wonder that ignorance and vice abound in a population so brought up. I will each day spend, set in motion, put into action only as much of it as is compatible with its normal duration, and healthy development. c, p. The family "must either go to the allotment to deposit their ordures," or, as happens in this place, saving your 690 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION presence, "use a closet with a trough set like a drawer in a chest of drawers, and drawn out weekly and conveyed to the allotment to be emptied where its contents were wanted." In Japan, the cir- cle of life-conditions moves more decently than this. x The denser hour of the ten hours' working- day contains more labour, i.e., expended labour-power, than the more porous hour of the twelve hours' working-day. This compulsory action of the State can take effect only within that inner sphere of circulation which is co-terminous with the terri- tories of the community, but it is also only within that sphere that money completely responds to its function of being the cir^ culating medium, or becomes coin. This result is owing to the quality of his labour, not to its quantity. Mr. Tucker. 334.) We would here only point out, that Ricardo puts his own more profound interpretation upon the words of Destutt. In Part IV. . With regard to actual receipts there is, therefore, great variety according to the different skill, strength, energy, staying- power, etc., of the individual labourers. c, p. "Since the restriction of the hours of work to ten, the factory occupiers maintain, although they have not yet practically gone the whole length, that suppos- ing the hours of work to be from 9 a. In the first phase of its circulation the commodity changes place with the money. ch. But neither is the number of labourers required to render fluid this mass of labour-power given (it changes with the degree of exploitation of the individual labour-power), nor is the price of this labour-power given, but only its mini- mum limit, which is moreover very variable. ally costs the employer; and considered in this light, labour is in almost all cases cheaper in rich countries than in those that are poorer, although the price of grain, and other provisions, is usuaHy much lower in the last than in the first... The labour realised in value, is labour of an average social quality; is consequently the expenditure of average labour-power. In dress- making, for instance, where the labour for the most part was al- ready organised, chiefly by simple co-operation, the sewing-machine at first formed merely a new factor in that manufacturing industry. 6. Wherever there is a working-day without restriction as to length, wherever there is night-work and unrestricted waste of human life, there the slightest obstacle presented by the nature of the work to a change for the better is soon looked upon as an everlasting barrier erected by Nature. ." (n. . Finally, the form C gives to the world of commodities a general social relative form of value, because, and in so far as, thereby all commodities, with the exception of one, are excluded from the equivalent form. Such reflux is not dependent on the commodity being sold for more than was paid for it. 278.) The same system ob- tains in the glass and paper works as in the metallurgical, already cited. They were followed by the police, came to blows with them and escaped. * Even without an alteration in the system of working, the simultaneous employment of a large number of labourers effects a revolution in the material conditions of the labour-process. p. Capital now sets the la- bourer to work, not with a manual tool, but with a machine which itself handles the tools. It is impressed upon the workpeople, as a great consolation, first, that their sufferings are only temporary ("a temporary inconvenience"), secondly, that machinery acquires the mastery over the whole of a given field of production, only by degrees, so that the extent and intensity of its destructive effect is diminished. The number of workmen in itself does not affect, either the rate of surplus-value, or the degree of exploitation of labour-power. London, 1800, p. iv.,p. It is only in Book III. His inquiry ranges on the one hand over the agricultural labourers, on the other, over silk-weavers, needle-women, kid-glovers, stocking- weavers, glove-weavers, and shoemakers. The snail's pace of this method corresponded in no wise with the commercial requirements of the new world-market that the great discoveries of the end of the 15th century created. If the day be lengthened by 2 hours, i.e., from 12 hours to 14, the surplus-labour remains at 6 hours, the surplus-value at 3 shillings, but the surplus-value decreases compared with the value of labour-power, as measured by the necessary labour-time. Large proprietors 2 .... But capital, as was said earlier, is at first indifferent as to the technical character of the labour- process; it begins by taking it just as it finds it. He will therefore sell them above their individual but under their social value, say at tenpence each. 360.) "Why not?" "Chiefly because the men who are gen- erally chosen, are men who know nothing about mines and such like." "Are not workmen summoned at all upon the juries?" "Never but as witnesses to my knowledge." "Who are the people who are generally summoned upon these juries?" "Generally tradesmen in the neighbourhood . During this time the work goes on fast and furious without intermission from 6 a. "The supply of labour is always, not only small, but uncertain." x "Though the produce divided between the capitalist and the labourer be large, the labourer takes so great a share that he soon becomes a capitalist. . c, Petersb edit., 1815, t. "The great evil of the factory system as at present con- ducted," says the first report of the Central Board of the Com- mission of June 28th, 1833, "has appeared to us to be that it en- tails the necessity of continuing the labour of children to the utmost length of that of the adults. Or better still. 2 For the farmer there is no more ingenious method of keeping his labourers well below the normal level, and yet of always having an extra hand ready for extra work, of ex- tracting the greatest possible amount of labour with the least possible amount of money, 3 and of making adult male labour "redundant." From the exposition already made, it will be under- stood why, on the one hand, a greater or less lack of employment for the agricultural labourer is admitted, while on the other, the gang-system is at the same time declared "necessary" on account of the want of adult male labour and its migration to the towns. The equivalence of their values is rather a necessary condition to its normal course. a day, where 500 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION a man at the rate of 2s. 1,828 Deficit I'r. All their housholde stuffe, which is very little woorthe, thoughe it might well abide the sale: yet beeynge sodainely thruste owte, they be constrayned to sell it for a thing of nought. It is altogether erroneous to suppose that modern machinery originally appropriated those operations alone, which division of labour had simpli- fied. most justly measured by labour" ("The works of B. . 8.) 8 "L'argent ... Com. for a fortnight on end; could not do it any more." "George Allinsworth, age 9, came here as cellar-boy last Friday; next morning we had to be- gin at 3, so I stopped here all night. Liverpool waxed fat on the slave-trade. lOd. The amount of this fall, the lowest limit of which is 3 shillings (the new value of labour-power), depends on the relative 1 To this third law MacGulloch has made, amongst others, this absurd addition, that a rise in surplus-value, unaccompanied by a fall in the value of labour-power, can occur through the abolition of taxes payable by the cap- italist. m. Here we have an increase in the number of products, unaccompanied by a fall in their individual prices: as their number increases, so does the sum of their prices. It attains this end by shortening the extent of the labourer's life, as a greedy farmer snatches increased prod- uce from the soil by robbing it of its fertility. to 5y P- m -» a D0V worked about four nights every week till children, constant access to plenty of light during the day, and to the direct rays of the sun lor apart of it, is most essential to health. c, p. The quantity of labour, however, is measured by its duration, and labour-time in its turn finds its standard in weeks, days, and hours. Supposons qu'il n'y ait qu'une seule denree, ou marchandise dans le monde, ou qu'il n'y ait qu'une seule qui s'achete, et qu' eile se divise comme l'argent: Cette partie de cette marchandise repondra a une partie de la masse de l'argent; la moitie du total de l'une a la moilie du total de l'autre, &c. x A service is nothing more than the useful effect of a use-value, be it of a commodity, or be it of labour. This boundary may, at any given period, be attained in the actual extent of economic time employed." ("An Essay on the Political Economy of Nations." London, 1821, pp. If now we equate butyric acid to propyl formate, then, in the first place, propyl formate would be, in this relation, merely a form of existence of G 4 H 8 2 ; and in the second place, we should be stating that butyric acid also consists of C 4 H 8 2 . Hence its movement, as the medium of circulation, is, in fact, merely the movement of commodities while changing their form. the minor improvements in machinery having for their object economy of power, the production of better work, the turning off more work in the same time, or in supplying the place of a child, a female, or a man, are constant, and although sometimes apparently of no great moment, have somewhat important results." 3 "Whenever a process requires peculiar dexterity and steadiness of hand, it is withdrawn, as soon as possible, from the cunning workman, who is prone to irregularities of many kinds, and it is placed in charge of a peculiar mechanism, so self-regulating that a 1 "The same cause which may increase the revenue of the country" (i.e., as Ricardo explains in the same passage, the revenues of landlords and capitalists, whose wealth, from the economic point of view, forms the Wealth of the Nation), "may at the same time render the population redundant and deteriorate the condition of the labourer." (Ricardo, 1. Any CO-OPERATION 323 average magnitude, however, is merely the average of a number of separate magnitudes all of one kind, but differing as to quantity. Wheels, rollers, spindles and shuttles are now pro- pelled at increased and increasing rates; fingers must be quicker and defter in their movements to take up the broken thread, for, if placed with hesitation or carelessness, they are sacrificed. On the return journey what Fourier calls "phanerogamie," is the order of the day. The state-creditors actually give nothing away, for the sum lent is transformed into public bonds, easily negotiable, which go on functioning in their hands just as so much hard cash would. c. "On n'a pas pu encore engager les Silesiens au partage des communes, tandis que dans la Nouvelle Marche, il n'y a guere de village ou ce partage ne soit execute avec le plus grand succes." (Mirabeau: "De la Monarchic Prussienne." Londres, 1788, t. 2 In cases where the additional time is gained by a multiplication of small thefts in the course of the day, there are insuperable difficulties to the inspectors making out a case." 3 These "small thefts" of capital from the labourer's meal and recreation time, the factory inspectors also designate as "petty pilferings of minutes," 4 "snatching a few minutes," 5 or, as the labourers technically called them, "nibbling and cribbling at meal-times." 6 1 Reports, &c, October 31st, 1860, p. The other CONSTANT CAPITAL AND VARIABLE CAPITAL 207 good, the capitalist is too much absorbed in money-grubbing to take notice of this gratuitous gift of labour. 4 6 7 — 7 1 6 1 3 5 7 1/-.2/-, 11 6 10 10 8 2 IV, 2 5 1/-.2/6, 5 1 4 2 1 1 London Economist, March 29lh, 1845, p. Let us now turn to its aspect as a whole. c, p. 2 "Fourth Report, &c, of Inland Revenue." Lond., 1860, p. . The number of implements that he himself can use simultaneously, is limited by the number of his own natural in- struments of production, by the number of his bodily organs. Or, to take an example nearer home, in every factory the labour is divided according to a system, but this division is not brought about by the operatives mutually exchanging their individual products. 1667, p. In the 16th century, the condition of the labourers had, as we know, become much worse. But, then, he tries to buy all commodities as cheaply as possible, and always accounts for his profit by simple cheating, by buying under, and selling over the value. (2.) Every change in the relation between the magnitudes of surplus-value and of the value of labour-power arises from a change in the absolute magnitude of the surplus-labour, and consequently of the surplus-value. Hence "the number of accidents which occur on Fridays, and especially on Saturdays, is much larger than on any other day. In English barracks the regulation space allotted to each soldier is 500-600 cubic feet, and in the military hospitals 1,200 cubic feet. 1647.) "Some of them (the boys) cannot read and write at all, I suppose?" "The majority cannot. He has become a slave-dealer. The result of the one is, that the capitalist lives; of the other, that the labourer lives. Let us now accompany the owner of some commodity — say, our old friend the weaver of linen— to the scene of action, the market. The "drawbacks" of the system are the over- work of the chil- dren and young persons, the enormous marches that they make daily to and from the farms, 5, 6, and sometimes 7 miles distant, finally, the demoralisation of the gang. . The historical progress and extension of exchanges de- velops the contrast, latent in commodities, between use-value and value. L'echange de deux valeurs inegales ... 2 "Rep. The more he produces, the more he is able to sell. A lamentation on this score was heard in England during the whole of the fifteenth, and the first half of the eighteenth centuries. The measure of values measures commodities consid- ered as values; the standard of price measures, on the contrary, quantities of gold by a unit quantity of gold, not the value of one quantity of gold by the weight of another. For operations that demand more exercise of will than actual force, the only power applicable is that controlled every instant by the human mind — in other words, man-power." Mr. Morton then reduces steam-power, horse- power, and man-power, to the unit in general use for steam-engines, namely, the force required to raise 33,000 lbs. Of the lat- ter 13-^- lbs. Let the two parts at starting be equal; 3 shillings value of labour-power, 3 shillings surplus-value. The whole working-day then amounts to 12 hours and is embodied in a value of 6 shillings. The labourers that dwell on the farms of 400-1,000 acres (they are called "confined labourers") are solely employed on such kinds of agricultural work as is permanent, difficult, and carried on by aid of horses. This it cannot so long as it sticks in its bourgeois skin. The factory in England is still a "mill." In German technological works of the first decade of this century, the term "muhle" is still found in use, not only for all machinery driven by the forces of Nature, but also for all manufactures where apparatus in the nature of machinery is applied. Their weekly wages are about 12s., and although it may be as- sumed that a man earns on piece-work under the greater stimulus to labour, Is. or perhaps 2s. Again, a combination of labour occurs whenever a build- ing, for instance, is taken in hand on different sides simultaneously; although here also the co-operating masons are doing the same, or the same kind of work. Thus it becomes — money. c, p. But Ireland is at present only an agricultural district of England, 1 The total yearly income under Schedule D. "A strong south-west wind blows over the whole country for 8 or 9 months in the year, bringing with it torrents of rain, which discharge princi- pally upon the western slopes of the hills. The doorway and window were rhomboi- dal." Of 17 houses visited, only 4 had more than one bedroom, and those four over-crowded. These allotments are at a distance from the houses, which are without privies. But capitalist production begets, with the inexorability of a law of Nature, its own negation. c, pp. A childish silly employ" (a warning this, by presentiment, against the Basedows and their modern MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 489 So long as Factory legislation is confined to regulating the labour in factories, manufactories, &c, it is regarded as a mere interference with the exploiting rights of capital. 1 11 Portland Street, No. 112 . 1 "Les economistes ont une singuliere maniere de proc6der. Value Export' ed. ("An Essay on Trade and Com- merce," London, 1770, p. Such an equalisation can only be something foreign to their real nature, consequently only "a makeshift for practical purposes." Aristotle therefore, himself, tells us, what barred the way to his further analysis; it was the absence of any concept of value. A coat as such no more tells us it is value, than does the first piece of linen we take hold of. It is only because his»moncy constant- ly functions as capital that the economic guise of a capitalist at- taches to a man. In the example we have taken, it is necessary that the value of labour- power should actually fall by one-tenth, in order that the necessary labour-time may be diminished by one-tenth, i.e., from ten hours to nine, and in order that the surplus-labour may consequently be prolonged from two hours to three. of Fact, for 31st October, 1865." 2 Rep. Employment of women. I., p. 70). 482 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION strikingly shows that the capitalist mode of production, owing to its very nature, excludes all rational improvement beyond a certain point. Thus from this cause only, 906 accidents have occurred during the six months. (F. Suppose that 400,000 yards of 1 MacCulloch, amongst others, is a past master in this pretentious cret- inism. 2 In all countries of Europe, 1 "The petty proprietors who cultivated their own fields with their own hands, and enjoyed a modest competence.... This realisation transfers the commodity from the seller to the buyer and removes the money from the hands of the buyer into those of the seller, where it again goes through the same process with another, commodity. A young wife, two pretty children, a cluster of pawn-tickets, and a bare room were all he had to show." On the after pains of the crisis of 1866, the following extract from a Tory newspaper. 2,776,218,427 lbs. In its modern form, the power-loom has undergone essential alterations. for journeymen tailors in and around London, except in cases of gen- eral mourning; still, 13 George III., c. But this return is not owing to the circulation of the first 20 yards of linen; that circulation resulted in the money getting i nto the hands of the seller of the Bible. This, therefore, is to give you most respectful notice that when we commence work again after the Christmas and New Year's holidays, we shall work 60 hours per week, and no more, or from six to six, with one hour and a half out." (Reports, &c, for 30th April, 1860, p. 170 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION Such an inquiry, however, would have been foreign to the analy- sis of commodities. If, for example, the capitalist have advanced £500, of which £400 is laid out in means of production and £100 in wages, and if the rate of surplus-value be 20%, the rate of profit will be 20 : 500, i.e., 4% and not 20%, Then follows a splendid example of Mill's method of han- dling the different historical forms of social production. From 1814 to 1820 these 15,000 inhabitants, about 3,000 families, were systematically hunt- ed and rooted out. 258- 261). Conservation, in an unaltered form, of the old modes of production was on the contrary the first condition of existence for all earlier industrial classes. They see no essential difference between them, and even give the name of machine to the simple mechanical powers, the lever, the inclined plane, the screw, the 1 Mill should have said, "of any human being not fed by other people's ur," for, without doubt, machinery has greatly increased the number labour, of well-to-do idlers 372 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION wedge, &c. 2 I. VALUE OF LABOUR-POWER AND WAOES 537 value, even of the commodity already produced, falls by half. c, vol. I pointed out, that while the workpeople are practically incapa- ble of doing themselves this sanitary justice, they are unable to obtain any effective support from the paid administrations of the sanitary police. Besides, boys must begin young to learn the trade. 285.) "When you speak of sub-inspectors, do you mean men at a less salary, and of an inferior stamp to the present inspectors?" "I would not have them inferior, if you could get them otherwise." (n. Yet it is what we do every day. of Fact, for 31st Oct., 1858.) CAPITALIST PRODUCTION their moral code, and especially by their ledgers, that it was only after the passing of the Act that they had recourse to machinery. One-sixth as much new labour is absorbed by each pound of cotton, and consequently, the value added by the labour to each pound is only one-sixth of what it formerly was. 2 1 "If my neighbour by doing much with little labour, can sell cheap, I must contrive to sell as cheap as he. One portion of this product is consumed by the magnates in kind, another is converted, for their use, by the labourers, into articles of luxury and such like things; while the rest forms the wages of the labourers, who own their implements of labour. That Mirabeau considers the separate workshops more economical and productive than the "combined," and sees in the latter merely artificial exotics under government cultivation, is explained by the position at that time of a great part of the continental manufactures. 98 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION labour- it is the standard of price inasmuch as it is a fixed weight of metal. This hap- pens at first in such branches of industry as are connected together by being separate phases of a process, and yet are isolated by the social division of labour, in such a way, that each of them pro- duces an independent commodity. 242. 136, n. This modern so-called domes- tic industry has nothing, except the name, in common with the old-fashioned domestic industry, the existence of which pre-sup- poses independent urban handicrafts, independent peasant farm- ing, and above all, a dwelling-house for the labourer and his family. These two antithetical transmutations of a commodity are brought about by two antithetical social acts on the part of the owner, and these acts in their turn stamp the character of the economic parts played by him. Whenever an individual capitalist cheapens shirts, for instance, by increasing the productiveness of labour, he by no means nec- essarily aims at reducing the value of labour-power and shorten- ing, pro tanto, the necessary labour-time. Ferguson, the master of Adam Smith, to exclaim: "We make a nation of Helots, and have no free citizens." x But, in spite of the numerous analogies and links connecting them, division of labour in the interior of a society, and that in the interior of a workshop, differ not only in degree, but also in kind. 39.) S. The price of labour falls again to a level corresponding with the needs of the self-expansion of capital, whether the level be below, the same as, or above the one which was normal before the rise of wages took place. By confounding these two distinct things some writers have been led to hold that the value of gold and silver is imaginary. The workshop of the mediae- val master handicraftsman is simply enlarged. The ratio between the two metals was then again altered by law, but the new nominal MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OP COMMODITIES 97 Commodities with definite prices present themselves under the form: a commodity A=x gold; b commodity B =z gold; c commodity C=y gold, &c, where a, b, c, represent definite quantities of the commodities A, B, G and x, z, y, definite quan- tities of gold. Ed. Baiter, Orelli, &c). Therefore, with diminishing pro- ductiveness of labour and a simultaneous lengthening of the working-day, the absolute magnitude of surplus-value may continue unaltered, at the same time that its relative magnitude diminishes; its relative magnitude may continue unchanged, at the same time that its absolute magnitude increases; and, provided the lengthening of the day be sufficient, both may increase. The capitalist main- 1 During the great strike of the London builders, 1860-61, for the reduction of the working-day to 9 hours, their Committee published a mani- festo that contained, to some extent, the plea of our worker. In that case he treads on dangerous ground. This he calls "systematic colonisation." First of all, Wakefield discovered that in the Colonies, property in money, means of subsistence, machines, and other means of production, does not as yet stamp a man as a capitalist if there be wanting the correlative— the wage-worker, the other man who is compelled to sell himself of his own free-will. Here it is a question merely of the time occu- pied by the labourer in doing the work; of the period during which the labour-power is usefully expended. the labour of the poor being the mines of the rich." 2 So also Bernard de Mandeville at the beginning of the eighteenth century: "It would be easier, where property is well secured, to live without money than without poor; for who would do the work? 104.) 3 James Anderson: "Observations on the Means of Exciting a Spirit of National Industry, &c," Edinburgh, 1777. The manufacturers have "mistaken prejudices against what they have >heard represented as a pseudo- philanthropic legislation." ("Rep. P. c, pp. (4.) Cambridgeshire Gamblingay belongs to several landlords. The only difference, therefore, between coin and bullion, is one of shape, and gold can at any time pass from one form to the other. Scotland is therefore the last refuge of the "noble passion." "In the Highlands," says Somers in 1848, "new forests are springing up like mushrooms. Source des Revolutions et des Utopies pretendues Socialistes." Paris, 1857, t. 56-57.) The Factory Inspectors remarked on the supple- mentary law of 1860, torn from these open-air bleachers: "The Act has not only failed to afford that protection to the workers which it appears to offer, but contains a clause ... This change of form no more implies, taken alone, a change in the quantity of value, than does the change of a £5 note into sover- eigns, half sovereigns and shillings. These cottages are seldom provided with gardens, but many of the inmates are able to farm small allotments at 10s. I., p 109. He has the right to force him to do any work, no matter how disgusting, with whip and chains. 39.) "Money is but the fat of the Body Politick, whereof too much doth as oiten hinder its agility, as too little makes it sick ... 241,120,973 lbs. It helps to create use-value without con- tributing to the formation of exchange-value. On the still worse condition in metal mines, see the very conscientious Report of the Royal Commission of 1864. Nevertheless, within certain limits, a modification takes place. The labourer therefore finds, in the work- shop, the means of production necessary for working, not only during six, but during twelve hours. How far this result is also attaina- ble, without cheapening commodities, will appear from an exami- nation of the particular modes of producing relative surplus- value, to which examination we now proceed. 52.) 1 "There is required for carrying on the trade of the nation a determi- nate sum of specifick money, which varies, and is sometimes more, some- times less, as the circumstances we are in require.... Sixth Report, 1864," p. J They are, one after the other, and with a degree of force unknown before, crushed by the competition of an agriculture managed by capital, and therefore they continual- ly furnish new recruits to the class of wage-labourers. The value of labour-power thus determines the value of labour, or, ex- pressed in money, its necessary price. This is the case if the individual labourer yields more labour, and therefore his wages increase, and this although the price of labour remains the same or even falls, only more slowly than the mass of labour rises. The simplest value-relation is evidently that of one commod- ity to some one other commodity of a different kind. The quantity of gold necessary to realise this sum, depends, in the first instance, on the rapidity of currency of the means of payment. 2 At the same time, the area under cultivation increased, from 1846 to 1856, by 464,119 acres, without reckoning the great area in the Eastern Counties which was transformed from rabbit warrens and poor pastures into magnificent corn-fields. Our investigation must therefore begin with the analysis of a com- modity. When these proportions have, by custom, at- tained a certain stability, they appear to result from the nature of the products, so that, for instance, one ton of iron and two ounces of gold appear as naturally to be of equal value as a pound of 1 When, therefore, Galiani says: Value is a relation between per- sons — "La Ricchezza e una ragione tra due persone," — he ought to have added: a relation between persons expressed as a relation between things. With new fashions, repairs, etc., a con- test arises between master and labourer, whether a particular piece of work is one hour, and so on, until here also experience decides. One person there does the work formerly divided between two. In many branches of industry where time-wage is the general rule without legal limits to the TIME-WAGES 547 working-time, the habit has, therefore, spontaneously grown up of regarding the working-day as normal only up to a certain point, e.g., up to the expiration of the tenth hour ("normal working-day," "the day's work," "the regular hours of work"). c. 24. It is impossible for them to rise or fall simultaneously. the average annual increase of income from 1853-1864 was only 0.93; whilst, in the same period, in Great Britain, it was 4.58. In fact, in those countries in which both metals are legally measures of value, and therefore both legal tender, so that everyone has the option of paying in either metal, the metal that rises in value is at a premium, and, like every other commodity, measures its price in the over-estimated metal which alone serves in reality as the standard of value. While division of labour in society at large, whether such division be brought about or not by exchange of commodities, is common to economic formations of society the most diverse, division of labour in the workshop, as practised by manufacture, is a special creation of the capitalist mode of production alone. If labourers are driven away by the demolition of their old houses, they do not leave their old parish, or at most they settle down on its borders, as near as they can get to it. From the above table it results:-^ THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 699 Horses Cattle Sheep Pigs Absolute Decrease Absolute Decrease Absolute Increase Absolute Increase 72,358 116,626 146,608 28.819 1 Let us now turn to agriculture, which yields the means of subsistence for cattle and for men. He lived there, because it was a tenantable cot," and because he wanted to have a cot for himself alone, anywhere, at any price, and in any conditions. 2 The establishment of a normal working-day is the result of centuries of struggle between capitalist and labourer. Besides these purely physical limitations, the extension of the working-day encounters moral ones. First, the decomposition of a process of production into its various successive steps coincides, here, strictly with the resolu- tion of a handicraft into its successive manual operations. child or young person." Clause 7, which imposes a penalty for employment of chil- dren, young persons, and women, contrary to the provisions of the Act, subjects to fines, not only the occupier of the workshop, whether parent or not, but even "the parent of, or the person deriving any direct benefit from the labour of, or having the con- trol over, the child, young person or woman." The Factory Acts Extension Act, which affects the large establishments, derogates from the Factory Act by a crowd of vicious exceptions and cowardly compromises with the masters. The means of payment enters the circulation, but only after the commodity has left it. . It will be remembered that we met, in the English agricultural proletariat, with a similar spectacle. Gamier. Hence exchange-value appears to be something accidental and purely relative, and consequently an intrinsic value, i.e., an exchange-value that is inseparably connected with, inherent in commodities, seems a contradiction in terms. At the same time, it thereby also revolu- tionises the division of labour within the society, and incessantly launches masses of capital and of workpeople from one branch of production to another. Newmarch, collaborator and editor of Tooke's "History of Prices." Is it a scientific advance to make cowardly concessions to public opinion? It must not be produced as the immediate means of subsistence of the pro- ducer himself. . Simpson (paper box and bagmaker, London) states before the commissioners of the Gh. Empl. and it rises to 22s., that is a rise of 10 per cent.; but if it is only 7s. On the other hand, the linen's own value comes to the front, receives independ- ent expression, for it is only as being value that it is comparable with the coat as a thing of equal value, or exchangeable with the coat. . But, so soon as it steps forth as a commodity, it is changed into something transcendent. Value, in this sense, necessarily implies exchanges, riches do not." * "Riches" (use-value) "are the attribute of men, value is the attribute of commodities. Ed. 1719. "The em- ployers avail themselves of the habitual irregularity in the home- work, when any extra work is wanted at a push, so that the work goes on till 11, and 12 p. National debts, i.e., the alienation of the state — whether despotic, constitutional or republican — marked with its stamp the capitalistic era. In the introduction to his work, where he ex p rofesso praises division of labour, he indicates only in a cursory manner that it is the source of social inequalities. In the third book we shall return again to the fanatical opposition of the mas- ters to those clauses which imposed upon them a slight expendi- ture on appliances for protecting the limbs of their workpeople, 1 The evidence of some Bradford export-houses is as follows: "Under these circumstances, it seems clear that no boys need be worked longer than from 8 a. Finally, the act of Parliament of June 29, 1871, made a pretence of removing the last traces of this class of legislation by legal recognition of Trades' Unions. The rights of the children had to be proclaimed. He, who before was the money-owner, now strides in front as capitalist; the possessor of labour-power follows as his labourer. x b. The particular commodity, with whose bodily form the equiv- alent form is thus socially identified, now becomes the money- commodity, or serves as money. One name that they preached about was Jesus Christ, but I cannot say any others, and J cannot tell anything about him. The same value in constant capital is embodied in more means of production, i.e., in more instru- ments of labour, materials of labour and auxiliary materials; it therefore also supplies more elements for the production both of use-value and of value, and with these more absorbers of labour. In Germany, they tried at first to make one spinner work two spinning-wheels, that is, to work simultaneously with both hands and both feet. It increased to 267,671. entirely confined to classes of property .... The adults work in two shifts, of eight hours each; but there is no alternation with the boys, on account of the expense (n. 260-273, passim. m. To employ 1,000 spinners, more raw material, spindles, &c, are, of course, required, than to employ 100. c, p. 3 'Tilings have an intrinsick vertue" (this is Barbon's special term lor value in use) "which in all places have the same vertue; as the loadstone to attract iron" (1. The latter has two fundamental forms. E. L. 107, et seq. C'etait cette annee tropique qu'il leur importait de marquer pour se diriger dans leurs operations agricoles. Such desolation, such hopelessness was about these people and their little room, as I should not care to witness again. 3 But only since the intro- duction of machinery has the workman fought against the instru- ment of labour itself, the material embodiment of capital. . 2 "Gold, yellow, glittering, precious gold! Thus much of this, will make black white; foul, fair; Wrong, right; base, noble; old, young; coward, valiant. In order to prevent these satellites from establishing themselves permanently in the place of gold, positive enactments determine the extent to which they must be compul- sorily received as payment instead of gold. 14, 15. 2 J. Two and a half days' labour has been embodied in it, of which two days were contained in the cotton and in the substance of the spindle worn away, and half a day was absorbed during the process of spinning. II n'est done pas un moyen de s'enrichir, puisque Ton donne autant que Ton recoit." (Le Trosne, 1. The gang-system, which during the last years has steadily increased, 2 clearly does not exist for the sake of the gang-master. Before we inquire how human material is incorporated with this objective organism, let us consider some general effects of this revolution on the labourer himself. c, p. Hence forms of social production that preceded the bourgeois form, are treated by the bourgeoisie in much the same way as the Fathers of the Church treated pre-Christian religions. His means of subsistence must therefore be sufficient to maintain him in his normal state as a labouring individual. All but one have come this morning. A. Even at the beginning of Louis XVI.'s reign (Ordinance of July 13th, 1777) every man in good health from 16 to 60 years of age, if without means of subsistence and not practising a trade, is to be sent to the galleys. Income from profits. 3 W. A machine-factory, says Ure, "displayed the division of labour in manifold gradations— the file, the drill, the lathe, having each its different workman in the order of skill." (P. The Governor-General took part in this private traffic. 10d., 4s. The minimum limit is, however, not determinable; of course, if we make the extension line B G or the surplus-labour =0, we have a minimum limit, i.e., the part of the day which the labourer must necessarily work for his own maintenance. lb.; the raw material therefore costs in round numbers £342. . This is similar to saying, that the value of cloth is estimated, not by the quantity of labour bestowed on its production, but by the quantity of labour bestowed on the production of the silver, for which the cloth is exchanged." ("A Critical Dissertation on the Nature, &c, of Value," pp 50, 51.) 536 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION give it an independent objective existence, he would sell a com- modity and not labour. Nominibus mollire licet mala. 79, 80, 85. ... London 1868; Vol. In the controversies on this subject the chief fact has generally been overlooked, viz., the differentia specifica of capitalistic production. The only remedy for this evil, short of the limitation of the labour of adults, which would, in our opinion, create an evil greater than that which is sought to be remedied, appears to be the plan of working double sets -of children." . is nothing unless it is sold." 2 1 Rossi. While great owners are thus escaping from poor-rates through the depopulation of lands over which 1 A show-village of this kind looks very nice, but is as unreal as the vil- lages that Catherine II. of Insp. Pierre Dupont in his "Ouvriers" sang: Mai vetus, loges dans des trous, Sous les combles, dans les decombres, Nous vivons avec les hiboux Et les larrons, amis des ombres. 139.) 2 "The inextinguishable passion for gain, the auri sacra fames, will always lead capitalists." (MacCulloch: "The Principles of Polit. 19, 20.) In the year 1848, after the passing of the 10 hours' bill, the masters of some flax spinning mills, scattered, few and far between, over the country on the borders of Dorset and Somerset, foisted a petition against the bill on to the shoulders of a few of their workpeople. 1. But the sum of the prices of the circulating commodities depends on the quantity, as well as on the prices, of the commodities. Hence we see, that whether a use-value is to be regarded as raw material, as instrument of labour, or as product, this is deter- mined entirely by its function in the labour-process, by the posi- tion it there occupies: as this varies, so does its character. (Messrs. c, p 88. It takes a "serious" man, a la Lavergne, to be caught by such childishness. We assumed, on the occasion of its sale, that the value of a day's labour-power is three shillings, and that six hours' labour is incorporated in that sum; and consequently that this amount of labour is requisite to produce the necessaries of life daily re- quired on an average by the labourer. 4 With Plato, division of labour within the community is a develop- ment from the multifarious requirements, and the limited capacities of indi- viduals. For instance, Bruckner, "Theorie du Systeme animal," Leyde, 1767, in which the whole subject of the modern population theory is THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 617 Under the conditions of accumulation supposed thus far, which conditions are those most favourable to the labourers, their relation of dependence upon capital takes on a form endur- able, or, as Eden says: "easy and liberal." Instead of becoming more intensive with the growth of capital, this relation of dependence exhausted, and to which the passing quarrel between Quesnay and his pu- pil, the elder Mirabeau, furnished ideas on the same topic; then Parson Wallace, Parson Townsend, Parson Malthus and his pupil, the arch- Parson Thomas Chalmers, to say nothing of lesser reverend scrib- blers in this line. The great beauty of capitalist production consists in this— that it not only constantly reproduces the wage-worker as wage- worker, but produces always, in proportion to the accumulation of capital, a relative surplus-population of wage-workers. The value of commodity A, is qualitatively expressed, by the fact that commodity B is directly exchangeable with it. When a considerable advance in the powers of national industry has actually taken place, profits rise into comparative importance as a source of accumula- tion." (Richard Jones, "Textbook, &c," pp. It is clear, however, that the difference between the labour a machine costs, and the capitalist mode of calculating, which appears, primd facie, absurd, and repug- nant to the laws of the creation of value, will be explained in the third book of this work. x Since, however, the properties of a thing are not the result of its relations to other things, but only manifest themselves in such relations, the coat seems to be endowed with its equivalent form, its property of being directly exchangeable, just as much by Nature as it is endowed with the property of being heavy, or the capacity to keep us warm. 4. 2 The modern turbine frees the industrial exploitation of water-power from many of its former fetters. Iron rusts and wood rots. The tempo- rary or local want of labour brings about no rise in wages, but a forcing of the women and children into the fields, and exploi- tation at an age constantly lowered. (See "Rep. For there are also private gangs. of cotton be requisite to spin 1 lb. It certainly augments the demand for the labour of children and increases the rate of their wages." On the other hand, this same dispenser of consolation defends the lowness of the children's wages on the ground that it prevents parents from sending their children at too early an age into the factory. The manufacturing period simplifies, improves, and multiplies the implements of labour, by adapting them to the exclusively special functions of each detail labourer. The mass of the surplus-value produced is therefore equal to the surplus-value which the working-day of one labourer supplies 304 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION multiplied by the number of labourers employed. 14th, 1843— "It is one of the most melancholy features in the social state of this country that we see, beyond the possibility of denial, that while there is at this moment a decrease in the consuming powers of the people, an increase of the pressure of privations and distress; there is at the same time a constant accumulation of wealth in the upper classes, an increase of the luxuriousness of their habits, and of their means of enjoyment.** (Hansard, 13th Feb.) 652 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION rate, whether the extremes of poverty are less, I do not presume to say" 1 How lame an anti-climax! If the working-class has re- mained "poor," only "less poor" in proportion as it produces for the wealthy class "an intoxicating augmentation of wealth and power," then it has remained relatively just as poor. He is not a slave, but a soldier of peace, and deserves his place in married men's quarters to be provided by the landlord, who has claimed a power of enforced labour similar to that the country demands of the soldier. It thus appeared that the well-to-do classes had a lease of life which was more than double the value of that which fell to the lot of the less favoured citizens." x In order to conform to these circumstances, the absolute increase of this section of the prole- tariat must take place under conditions that shall swell their numbers, although the individual elements are used up rapidly. Here, it is only at the end of the term that the buyer has actually received the use-value of the commodity. Now there are 28 towns with more than 50,000 inhabitants. And of what does this surplus-product consist? Smith, that which must arise from a different application of what is saved, founded upon a real distinction between the different kinds of labour maintained by it." (Malthus, 1 c, pp. We then take various pieces of iron, whose weight has been determined beforehand. II. In proportion as the new farms arose, not only were no new cottages built: old ones were demolished, and the supply of la- bour had to come from open villages, miles away, by long roads that wound along the sides of the hills. These imagi- nary expressions, arise, however, from the relations of production themselves. Go-operation ever constitutes the fundamental form of the capitalist mode of production; nevertheless the elementary form of co-operation continues to subsist as a particular form of capi- talist production side by side with the more developed forms of that mode of production. (The Rev. Once arrived at this ex- treme limit, the least rise in the price of food, stoppage of work, illness, increases the labourer's distress and determines his com- plete ruin; debts accumulate, credit fails, the most necessary clothes and furniture are pawned, and finally, the family asks to be enrolled on the list of paupers." (Ducpetiaux, 1. 2 Science, generally speaking, costs the capitalist nothing, a fact that by no means hinders him from exploiting it. In the making of jewellery, just as in spinning, the surplus-value results only from a quanti- tative excess of labour, from a lengthening-out of one and the same labour-process, in the one case, of the process of making jewels, in the other of the process of making yarn. The child of 12 takes care of the little children all the day, and we get nothing till breakfast at eight. This double character arises from the nature of the ar- ticle produced. recent inquiry has discovered that even there, in districts once famous for fine men and gallant soldiers, the inhabi- tants have degenerated into a meagre and stunted race. of Fact., 31st October, 1863," pp. The question is, whether we both exchange something superfluous for something necessary." 3 We see in this passage, how Condillac not only confuses use-value with exchange-value, but in a really childish manner assumes, that in a society, in which the production of commodities is well developed, each producer produces his own means of subsistence, and throws into* circulation only the excess over his own requirements. 47, 246. X., Section 5). As the working-day is A B + B C or A C, it varies with the variable quantity B C. /ap5t7)v laivsfai." 8 "rioM' Y]jucrcct!o !pY«, xaxaiq 8'rjiwnaTo rcdvra." Every Athenian considered himself superior as a producer of commodities to a Spartan; for the latter in time of war had men enough at his disposal but could not command money, as Thucydides makes Pericles say in the speech inciting the Athenians to the Peloponnesian war: "ocoptaai te ItoijioTepoi ol auTo-jpYoi T<5v av»p»iwv rj xpijliaoi ™XepLsTv." (Thuc: 1 , l*c. 1 The value of labour-power was determined, not only by the labour-time necessary to maintain the individual adult labourer, but also by that necessary to maintain his family. The Hours of Labour Regulation Act, passed on August 17, 1867, regulates the smaller workshops and the so-called domestic industries. "The progress of social wealth," says Storch, "begets this useful class of society . The operatives are subject to great fluctuation from the constant experimentalising of the manufacturers... Thus the umbrella "assembles," first, 6% on the price of each of its elements, and a further 6% on its own total price. Just as the coat in its bodily form became a direct expression of value, so now does tailoring, a concrete form of labour, appear as the direct and palpable embodiment of human labour generally. 56, &c. 2 The second essential condition to the owner of money finding labour-power in the market as a commodity is this— that the labourer instead of being in the position to sell commodities in 1 In encyclopaedias of classical antiquities we find such nonsense as this — that in the ancient world capital was fully developed, "except that the free labourer and a system of credit was wanting." Mommsen also, in his "History of Rome," commits, in this respect, one blunder after another. Messrs. Further, there is not the least doubt, that if you make your "hands" toil for 13 hours, instead of lly, and, as may be expected from you, treat the work done in that extra one hour and a half, as pure surplus-labour, then the latter 3 1 will be increased from 5— hours' labour to 7-y- hours' labour, and 4 4 2 the rate of surplus-value from 100% to 12620%. . These reserves serve as con- duits for the supply or withdrawal of money to or from the circu- lation, which in this way never overflows its banks. there is no employment for them;" 4 and further, that during the active times they "are subject to broken days and to all kinds of interruptions." 5 These results of the agricultural revolution— i.e., the change of arable into pasture land, the use of machinery, the most rigo- rous economy of labour, &c, are still further aggravated by the model landlords, who, instead of spending their rents in other countries, condescend to live in Ireland on their demesnes. 3 How the capitalists as a class are to perform that feat, is a secret that vulgar economy has hitherto obstinately refused to divulge. These are all referable to the constitution of man himself (race, &c), and to surrounding Nature. William Petty, the 1 "Sophisms of Free Trade." 7th Ed. London, 1850, p. The villages are the property of Mr. G. 4. Malting: 1851, 10,566: 1861, 10,677. Further, it is only while he labours that he produces any value at all, and the amount of his labour is measured by his labour-time. 1 Other ways in which machinery affects the production of raw material will be mentioned in the third book. 57.) 598 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION same way that the Georgian slave-owner was lately delivered, by the abolition of slavery, from the painful dilemma, whether to squander the surplus-product, lashed out of his niggers, entirely in champagne, or whether to reconvert a part of it into more nig- gers and more land. Your reason? to 3s. Rep., 1864," p. And since the application of animal power is one of man's earliest inventions, production by machinery would have preceded produc- tion by handicrafts. 20-109 passim. A=u Com. The essential difference between the various economic forms of society, between, for instance, a society based on slave-labour, and one based on wage-labour, lies only in the mode in which this surplus-labour is in each case extracted from the actual producer, the labourer. Hence the circuit made by one commodity in the course of its metamorphoses is inextricably mixed up with the circuits of other commodities. "Report by Dr. Henry Julian Hunter on the excessivt mortality of infants in some rural districts of England." 6 1. The recent scientific discovery, that the products of labour, so far as they are values, are but material expressions of the human labour spent in their production, marks, indeed, an epoch in the history of the development of the human race, but, by no means, dissipates the mist through which the social character of labour appears to us to be an objective character of the products them- selves. Mark Wilks: "Historical Sketches of the South of India.'* Lond., 1810-17, v. Though the necessary labour-time was constant, we saw, on the other hand, that the total working-day was variable. In 1834, e.g. But then the manufacturers proposed to the Poor Law Commissioners that they should send the "surplus-population" of the agricultural districts to the north, with the explanation "that the manufac- turers would absorb and use it up." 3 "Agents were appoint- ed with the consent of the Poor Law Commissioners. I may also add that every question and its answer are numbered in the English Blue books. But we do not think that any line could be drawn over the age of 12, at which boys could be dispensed with for night-work. 544 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION money for the same quantity of labour. 162 yds. e., prevents the return to the soil of its elements consumed by man in the form of food and clothing; it therefore violates the condi- tions necessary to lasting fertility of the soil. The converted form under which the daily, weekly, &c, value of labour-power presents itself, is hence that of time- wages, therefore day-wages, &c. of cotton can be spun into 1 J- lbs, of yarn, then 190 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 10 lbs. 9.) 6 "Ch. Empl. 459.) Infants that take opiates "shrank up into little old men," or "wizened like little monkeys." (1. But even apart from these relative differences of the value of money in different countries, it will be found, frequently, that the daily or weekly, &c, wage in the first nation is higher than in the second, whilst the relative price of labour, i.e., the price of labour as compared both with surplus-value and with the value of the product, stands higher in the second than in the first. 102, 104, 105. Legislation on wage-labour (from the first, aimed at the ex- ploitation of the labourer and, as it advanced, always equally hostile to him), x is started in England by the Statute of La- bourers, of Edward III., 1349. This is seen in a striking manner when they treat of banking, where the com- monplace definitions of money will no longer hold water. That mass remains constantly within the sphere of circulation, continually functions as a circulating medium, and exists exclusively for that purpose. "Soyons riches ou parais- sons riches" (Diderot). 43. Custodi, Parte Moderna, t. . 213. Money that represents commodities long withdrawn from circulation, continues to be current. Surplus-value / s\_ Surplus-value Surplus-labour Variable Capital \ v/~ Value of labour-power - Necessary labour The two first of these formulae represent, as a ratio of values, that which, in the third, is represented as a ratio of the times during which those values are produced. In conse- quence of a quarrel with his employer he left the works, and de- clared that under no circumstances would he work for that master any more. c, pp 35, 36.) 761 CHAPTER XXXir HISTORICAL TENDENCY OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION WhaT does the primitive accumulation of capital, i.e. , its histori- cal genesis, resolve itself into? But with the development of circulation, conditions arise under which the alienation of commodities becomes separated, by an sui quali si raggirauo tutte le operazioni di economia politica." (Verri, 1. On the other hand, the retardation of the currency reflects the separation of these two processes into isolated antithetical phases, reflects the stagnation in the change of form, and therefore, in the social interchange of matter. And for a society based upon the production of commodities, in which the producers in general enter into social relations with one another by treating their products as commodities and values, whereby they reduce their individual private labour to the stand- ard of homogeneous human labour — for such a society, Chris- tianity with its cultus of abstract man, more especially in its bourgeois developments, Protestantism, Deism, &c, is the most fitting form of religion. In this respect their conquest of social power appears as the fruit of a victorious struggle both against feudal lordship and its revolting prerogatives, and against the guilds and the fetters they laid on the free development of production and the free exploitation of man by man. 23. that, with a given rate of surplus-value, we may have any number of rates of profit, and that various rates of surplus-value may, under given conditions, express themselves in a single rate of profit. 1858.— 1 in 15. Only under certain circumstances does it become capital. They are to be tied to the cart-tail and whipped until the blood streams from their bodies, then to swear an oath to go back to their birthplace or to where they have lived the last three years and to "put themselves to labour." What grim irony! In27 Henry VIII. 1 whose industry holds second place in the world, without on that account entirely losing their colonial character."— F. This component of the value of the product, i.e., the £410 in our example, would be eliminated, but the sum of £180, the amount of new value cre- ated, or the value produced, which contains £90 of surplus-value, would remain just as great as if c represented the highest value 1 "If we reckon the value of the fixed capital employed as a part of the advances, we must reckon the remaining value of such capital at the end of the year as a part of the annual returns." (Malthus, "Princ. The smaller capitals, therefore, crowd into spheres of production which Modern Industry has only sporadically or incompletely got hold of. 23.) 2 "The next evil is one which one would scarcely expect to find in a country which exports more labour than any other in the world, with the exception, perhaps, of China and England-^the impossibility of procuring a sufficient number of hands to clean the cotton. * Reports, &c, for 30th April, 1848, p. Here the movement of profit, rent of land, &c, that come 1 Sismondi, 1. ... By expressing the magnitudes of their values in one and the same material, the linen, those magnitudes are also compared with each other. To-day, therefore, the force of attraction, drawing together individual capitals, and the tendency to centralisation are stronger than ever before. The European states tore one an- other to pieces about the patent of this invention, and, once en- tered into the service of the surplus-value makers, did not merely lay under contribution in the pursuit of this purpose their own people, indirectly through protective duties, directly through export premiums. Vanderlint, not to mention others. Besides the exertion of the bodily organs, the process demands that, during the whole operation, the workman's will be steadily in consonance with his purpose. Indeed, the reductioji in the cost of weav- ing, in the case of many descriptions of ribbons, has not been accompanied by any corresponding reduction in the selling price of the manufactured arti- cle." (Mr. F. Note further: Although Malthus was a par- son of the English State Church, he had taken the monastic vow of celibacy — one of the conditions of holding a Fellowship in Protestant Cambridge Univer- sity: "Socios collegiorura maritos esse non permittimus, sed statim postquam quis uxorem duxerit, socius collegii desinat esse." ("Reports of Cambridge University Commission," p. This latter value decreases with the decrease of the labour-time neces- sary for its reproduction; the total decrease being the sum of all the different curtailments of labour-time effected in those various and distinct industries. . Many cots and little gardens here. 1 It therefore also, for the first time, conquers for industrial capital the entire home-market. 20. Of course, this labour-power, which remains the same under all its modifications, must have attained a certain pitch of development before it can be expended in a multiplicity of modes. 1 According to Gaskell, the steam-engine was from the very first an antagonist of human power, an antagonist that enabled the capitalist to tread under foot the growing claims of the work- men, who threatened the newly born factory system with a cri- sis. Our estimated saving in waste is about 10% in the quantity of cotton consumed." "In another fine-spinning mill in Manchester, I was informed that through increased speed and the adoption of some self-acting processes, a reduction had been made, in number, of a fourth in one department, and of above half in another, and that the introduction of the combing 1 Ure, 1. It was "in almost exclusive possession of the East Indian trade and the commerce between the south-east and north- west of Europe. The less time spent in work, the more of that time has to be turned into surplus labour-time. c, pp. So also was it with Holland and England. . The value of the product is exactly equal to the value of the capital advanced. It is just because handicraft skill con- tinues, in this way, to be the foundation of the process of produc- tion, that each workman becomes exclusively assigned to a partial function, and that for the rest of his life, his labour-power is turned into the organ of this detail function. 636 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION the technical revolution of the process of production that accom- panies, and is accelerated by, the advance of accumulation; and more rapidly than the corresponding diminution of the variable part of capital as compared with the constant. Now Chrematistic is distinguishable from (Economic in this way, that "in the case of Chrematistic circulation is the source of riches (tioiiq-cixt) ypr)}iaT(ov... As the use of machinery becomes more general in a partic- ular industry, the social value of the product sinks down to its individual value, and the law that surplus-value does not arise from the labour-power that has been replaced by the machinery, but from the labour-power actually employed in working with the machinery, asserts itself. 40.) * Friedrich Engels, 1. 2 In both cases, be the machine ever so young and full of life, its value is no longer determined by the labour actually materialised in it, but by the labour-time requisite to reproduce either it or the better machine. B's commodity replaces that of A, but A and B do not mutually exchange those commodities. 2 Rep., &c, for 30th April, 1850. 44,653 ts. To express this, 1 call the value-composition of capital, in so far as it is determined by its technical composition and mirrors the changes of the latter, the organic composition of capital. ." to "Nassau W. It limits the working-day for children from 8 to 13, and for women to 16 hours, between 6 a. c, p. This saving in labour was carried still fur- ther in 1865, by the employment of steam power. The simple transforma- tion of money into the material factors of the process of produc- tion, into means of production, transforms the latter into a title and a right to the labour and surplus-labour of -others. They were ordinary men, not Cyclops. When once we know this, such a mode of expression does no harm; it simply serves as an abbreviation. Means of Payment In the simple form of the circulation of commodities hitherto considered, we found a given value always presented to us in a double shape, as a commodity at one pole, as money at the oppo- site pole. "The French," he says, "laugh at our enthusiastic ideas of liber- ty." I. Instances of machines for the fabrication of these mechanical tools are, the automatic bobbin-making engine, the card-setting engine, shuttle-making machines, and machines for forging mule and throstle spindles, MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 375 by turning the crank of a mill, 1 by pumping, by moving up and down the arm of a bellows, by pounding with a mortar, &c, such implements soon call for the application of animals, water, 2 and wind as motive powers. 706 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION tainedonly by bayonets and by a state of siege, now open, now dis- guised, they have to observe all the precautions of language that their colleagues in England disdain. Now in 1862 the British juryman had in a law-suit to decide whether soot, with which, unknown to the buyer, 90% of dust and sand are mixed, is genuine soot in the commercial sense or adulterated soot in the legal sense. Dr. Aikin says in a work published in 1795: "The trade of Manchester may be divided into four periods. The folly is now patent of the economic wisdom that preaches to the labourers the accommodation of their number to the requirements of capital. Despite the important part which this method plays in actual practice, we are excluded from considering it in this place, by our assumption, that all commodi- ties, including labour-power, are bought and sold at their full val- ue. 224, and see p. If now we take in turn each of the two different forms which self-expanding value successively assumes in the course of its life, we then arrive at these two prop- ositions: Capital is money: Capital is commodities. Moreover, where the manufacturer owned the cottages of the workpeople, he paid himself his rents by deducting the amount from these mis- erable wages. Quite the contrary: whenever, by an exchange, we equate as values our different products, by that very act, we also equate, as human labour, the different kinds of labour expended upon them. 1 " 6 " (no male 1. The value of the linen remains unaltered in mag- nitude, whether expressed in coats, coffee, or iron, or in number- less different commodities, the property of as many different own- ers. The silver ornaments are brought out and coined when there is a high rate of interest, and go back again when the rate of interest falls. Only since the catastrophe of 1846 1 1. We are, therefore, forced to the conclusion that the change originates in the use-value, as such, of the commodity, i.e., in its consump- tion. It reaches, therefore, in that year, the time for its periodical reproduction, for its replacement by new ones of the same kind. c.) 2 In January, 1861, John C. Whilst in our example two pieces of a commodity, after subtraction of the value of the means of production consumed in them, are worth 6d. . ... Productive activity, if we leave out of sight its special form, viz., the useful character of the labour, is nothing but the ex- penditure of human labour-power. And this is the way in which, for many years, it has been actually operating in this kingdom." 3 He sums up the effect of the enclosures thus: "Upon the whole, the circumstances of the lower ranks of men are altered in almost every respect for the worse. 62-63. injury to the delicate moving parts of metallic mecha- nism by inaction." (Ure, 1. On the other hand, the conver- sion of fractional work into the life-calling of one man, corresponds to the tendency shown by earlier societies, to make trades heredi- tary; either to petrify them into castes, or whenever definite his- torical conditions beget in the individual a tendency to vary in a 1 "The more any manufacture of much variety shall be distributed and assigned to different artists, the same must needs be better done and with greater expedition, with less loss of time and labour." ("The Advantages of the East India Trade," Lond , 1720, p. If then, we reverse the series, 20 yards of linen =1 coat or =10 lbs. Had it not existed before, neither could it after that transaction." (Ramsay, 1. l The lightening of the labour, even, becomes a sort of torture, since the machine does not free the labourer from work, but deprives the work of all interest. Upon asking her to spell her name, she straightway made a mis- take, by beginning with the letter G, but correcting herself immediately, she said her name began with a K. It is compatible only with a system of production, and a society, moving within narrow and more or less primitive bounds. . In other cases each set works 24 hours consecutively on alternate days, one set working 6 hours on Monday, and 18 on Saturday to make up the 24 hours. 22. 90, 91.) THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 633 pressure, crisis and stagnation, depends on the constant forma- tion, the greater or less absorption, and the re-formation of the industrial reserve army or surplus-population. 1072.) "Could a man leave by giving 14 days' notice?" "Yes." (n. 52,877 . 1 1 This is one of the circumstances that makes production by slave la- bour such a costly process. The 1 Children's Employment Commission, p. 443, 444.) Say, not in the least troubled as to the consequences of this statement, borrows it, almost word for word, from the Physiocrats. It is very convenient to be "liberal" at the expense of the middle ages. . Times, Feb. Factory Inspector Stuart, himself a Scotchman, and in contrast to' the English Factory Inspectors, quite taken captive by the capi- talistic method of thinking, remarks expressly on this letter which he incor- porates in his report that it is "the most useful of the communications which any of the factory-owners working with relays have given to those engaged in the same trade, and which is the most calculated to remove the prejudices of such of them as have scruples respecting any change of the arrangement of the hours of work." 312 PAET IT PRODUCTION OF RELATIVE SURPLUS-VALUE CHAPTER XII THE CONCEPT OF RELATIVE SURPLUS-VALUE That portion of the working-day which merely produces an equivalent for the value paid by the capitalist for his labour-power, has, up to this point, been treated by us as a constant magnitude, and such in fact it is, under given conditions of production and at a given stage in the economic development of society. of tea, etc., that is to say, if "we give expression to the converse relation already implied in the series, we get, C. THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 665 graceful. Sanderson, "this would suit as 1 1. This was the period in which the right to prolong the hours of labour to an outrageous extent was established; 1 the period that was especially character- ised by an accelerated accumulation of capital here, by pauper^ ism there. On the other hand, it arises from the co-operation of artificers of one handicraft; it splits up that partic- ular handicraft into its various detail operations, isolating, and making these operations independent of one another up to the point where each becomes the exclusive function of a particular la- bourer. "The Slave Power," London, 1862, p. In general, the greater the productiveness of labour, the less is the labour-time required for the production of an article, the less is the amount of labour crystallised in that article, and the less is its value; and vice versa, the less the productiveness of labour, the greater is the labour-time required for the production of an article, and the greater is its value. to E THE GENERAL LAW OP CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 701 PER ACRE, AND TOTAL PRODUCT OF 1865 COMPARED WITH 1864 Table C 1865 Increase or Decrease, 1865 Total Product 1864 1865 Increase or Decrease, 1865 13.0 0.3 12.3 0.2 14.9 1.0 14.8 1.6 10.4 1.9 3.6 0.5 9.9 0.4 13.3 2.8 10.4 1.1 25.2 9.0 1.8 0.2 Qrs. One might as well conclude that not the value of a machine is paid, but that of its working, because it costs more to hire a machine for a week than for a day. He must be his customer as well as his tenant. Such properties claim our attention only in so far as they affect the utility of those commodities, make them use-values. And although this reproduction is a mere repetition of the process of production on the old scale, yet this mere repetition, or continuity, gives a new character to the process, or, rather, causes the disap- pearance of some apparent characteristics which it possessed as an isolated discontinuous process. . "Le solstice est le moment de l'annee ou commence la crue du Nil, et celui que les Egyptiens ont du observer avec le plus d'attention . In the one case, more silver would be current than gold was before, in the other case, less gold would be current than silver was before. The word pound, as a money-name, thus becomes differen- tiated from the same word as a weight-name. Creation of value is transformation of labour-power into labour. Only five J 1. The description of the workshops, more especially those of the London printers and tail- ors, surpasses the most loathsome phantasies of our romance writ- ers. The manufacturer, therefore, asks for children who look as if they were already 13 years old. This naive form of hoarding becomes perpetuated in those communities in which the traditional mode of production is carried on for the supply of a fixed and limited circle of home wants. For instance, Ricardo declares that he agrees with Destutt de Tracy in this proposition: "As it is certain that our physical and moral facul- ties are alone our original riches, the employment of those faculties, labour of some kind, is our only original treasure, and it is always from this employ- ment that all those things are created, which we call riches.... At one time money must be attracted in order to act as circulating coin, at another, circulating coin must be repelled in order to act again as more or less stagnant money. 3 Modern society, which, soon after its birth, pulled Plutus by the hair of 1 Henry III., most Christian king of France, robbed cloisters of their relics, and turned them into money. Hence, the sum of the prices to be realised, and consequently the quantity of the circulating medium depending on that sum, will vary with the numerous variations of these three factors in combination. To introduce it into the calculation would make no difference. by which a part only of the working-day — i.e., 6 hours' labour — is paid for, appears as the value or price of the whole working-day of 12 hours, which thus includes 6 hours unpaid for. The farmer may sell his corn above its value, or may buy the clothes at less than their value. Therefore, the common substance that manifests itself in the exchange-value of commod- ities, whenever they are exchanged, is their value. 2 So long as, instead of two distinct use-values being exchanged, a chaotic mass of articles are offered as the equivalent of a single article, which is often the case with savages, even the direct barter of products is in its first infancy. The antithesis, use-value and value; the contradictions that private labour is bound to manifest itself as direct social labour, that a particularised concrete kind of labour has to pass for abstract human labour; the contradiction between the personification of objects and the representation of persons by things; all these an- titheses and contradictions, which are immanent in commodities, assert themselves, and develop their modes of motion, in the antithetical phases of the metamorphosis of a commodity. as to the employment of women?" "The feeling is that it is degrading; and we wish as miners to have more respect to the fair sex than to see them placed on the pit bank . of the Strand . The detail labourer and his implements are the simplest ele- ments of manufacture. 129,106,753 lbs. c, p. The material wear and tear of a machine is of two kinds. 300 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION denounces as an ineffable disgrace to the English working-class that they inscribed "the slavery of the Factory Acts" on the banner which they bore against capital, manfully striving for "perfect freedom of labour." 1 France limps slowly behind England. (See Ch. I. Further, at that early period, the portion of society that lives on the labour of others is infinitely small compared with the mass of direct producers. 3 "There are no two countries which furnish an equal number of the neces- saries of life in equal plenty, and with the same quantity of labour. I. "As values, all commodities are only definite masses of congealed labour-time." 1 The value of a commodity would therefore remain constant, if the labour-time required for its production also remained constant. He remembered quite clearly that for the Messrs. A sum, many hundred times as great, of old values swells the value of his product, in which those re-appear in a new, useful form, and can thus func- tion anew as capital. So far therefore as the cir- culation of commodities effects a change in the form alone of their values, and is free from disturbing influences, it must be the exchange of equivalents. o oooo ^1 OS © $ o* OS CO 00 CM t^ ^H CO CO ^H CO OS »3« CM a . c, p 25. 2 They inaugurated the new era by practising on a colossal scale thefts of state lands, thefts that had been hitherto managed more modestly. The process, therefore, that clears the way for the capitalist system, can be none other than the process which takes away from the labourer the possession of his means of production; a process that transforms, on the one hand, the social means of subsistence and of production into capital, on the other, the immediate producers into wage- labourers. On the extravagant supposition that, after the agricultural revolution is complete one-fourth of these are again absorbable, there remain for emigration 921,174 persons. You may smile over Babylon in ruins and congrat- ulate the hardened Pharaoh on his overthrow in the Red Sea." (1. c, p. Hence the number of the labourers that co-operate, or the scale of co-operation, depends, in the first instance, on the amount of capital that the individual capitalist can spare for the purchase of labour-power; in other words, on the extent to which a single capitalist has command over the means of subsist- ence of a number of labourers. c, p. In many of these woods the fox, the wild cat, the marten, the pole- cat, the weasel and the Alpine hare are common; whilst the rabbit, the squir- rel and the rat have lately made their way into the country. But the coasting trade of India and between the islands, as well as the internal trade of India, were the monopoly of the higher employes of the company. We may here remark, that the language of commodities has, besides Heb- rew, many other more or less correct dialects. Thus the law of supply and demand of labour is kept in the right rut, the oscillation of wages is penned within limits satisfactory to capitalist exploitation, and lastly, the social dependence of the labourer on the capitalist, that indispensable requisite, is secured; an unmistakable relation of dependence, which the smug polit- ical economist, at home, in the mother-country, can transmogrify into one of free contract between buyer and seller, between equally independent owners of commodities, the owner of the commodity capital and the owner of the commodity labour. "(I. Transition from the General form of value to the Money-form The universal equivalent form is a form of value in general. V. The absentee landlords bleed this poor rook- ery too freely. In 1861 the number of persons occupied in England and Wales in the manufacture of agricultural machines was 1,034, whilst the number of agricul- tural labourers employed in the use of agricultural machines and steam-engines did not exceed 1,205. Nor on the other hand must it be supposed that even when the labourer is housed upon the lands which he cultivates, his household circumstances are gener- ally such as his life of productive industry would seem to deserve. But this change of hands is what constitutes their exchange, and the latter puts them in relation with each other as values, and realises them as values. 21, 13 710 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION day, Sunday and week day, always the same the year round. The ages of the children and young persons run through all intermediate grades, from 8 (in some cases from 6) to 18. III., pp. With the advance of accu- mulation, therefore, the proportion of constant to variable capi- tal changes. 2 As to raw material, 3 there is not the least doubt that the rapid strides of cotton spinning, not only pushed on with tropical luxuriance the growth of cotton 1 According to the census of 1861 (Vol. I. Similar experiments, and with the like success, were carried out in the mills of Messrs. de Mandeville's Remarks to his "Fable of the Bees, or Private Vices, Pub- lick Benefits." (First ed., without the remarks, 1706; with the remarks, 1714.) 1 "There is no longer anything which we can call the natural reward of individual labour. This is the absolute general law of capitalist accumu- lation. The special tools of the various detail workmen, such as those of the beaters, combers, spinners, &c, in the woollen manufacture, are now transformed into the tools of specialised machines, each machine constituting a special organ, with a special function, in the system. * Hence the increase of the hands in these latter trades was merely a symptom of a diminution in the total number employed. . "A young woman having fever, lay at night in a room occupied by her father and mother, her bastard child, two young men (her brothers), and her two sisters, each with a bastard child— 10 per- sons in all. If, for example, we wish to calculate the amount of England's profits from the cotton industry, we first of all deduct the sums paid for cotton to the United States, India, Egypt and other countries; in other words, the value of the capital that merely re-appears in the value of the product, is put =0. Wakefield.) 2 See "Public Health. SECTION 2.— THE DETAIL LABOURER AND HIS IMPLEMENTS If we now go more into detail, it is, in the first place, clear that a labourer who all his life performs one and the same simple operation, converts his whole body into the automatic, special- ised implement of that operation. During this century far more than £200,000,000 has been coined in India. B. "The labour of women in the fields," says Dr. Smith, "whatever may be its disadvantages, .... "The more society progresses, the more abstinence is de- manded," 1 namely, from those who ply the industry of appropri- ating the fruits of others' industry. Thenceforth a phenomenon that we have already met with, name- ly, the intensification of labour, develops into great importance. He adds that he does not know all the methods, and does not mention all that he knows. But in truth, the rate of surplus-value is not equal to =r or —r— but to — : thus it is not 90 90 G c + v v £qq but 5q or 100% , which is more than five times the apparent de- gree of exploitation. This happened since 1604 under Charles X. It was £3,000, it is now £3,600. Therefore, 10 lbs. 3 In place of the pompous cata- logue of the "inalienable rights of man" comes the modest Magna Charta of a legally limited working-day, which shall make clear "when the time which the worker sells is ended, and when his own begins." 4 Quantum mutatus ab illo! 1 "The proceedings (the manoeuvres of capital, e.g., from 1848-50) have afforded, moreover, incontrovertible proof of the fallacy of the asser- tion so often advanced, that operatives need no protection, but may be consid- ered as free agents in the disposal of the only property which they possess— the labour of their hands and the sweat of their brows." (Reports, &c, for April 30th, 1850, p. 3 as, the increase of its productive power." (Ure, 1. apparently so worded that, unless persons are detected working after 8 o'clock at night they appear to come under no pro- tective provisions at all, and if they do so work, the mode of proof is so doubtful that a conviction can scarcely follow." (1. But in the straw-plait schools space is more sparingly allotted than 2 1 in the lace-schools, "12^-, 17, 18 — and below 22 cubic feet for each person." The smaller of these numbers, says one of the commission- ers, Mr. White, represents less space than the half of what a child would occupy if packed in a box measuring 3 feet in each direction. The mistresses take orders from manufacturers, or from warehousemen, and employ as many women, girls, and young children as the size of their rooms and the fluctuating demand of the business will allow. and 9 p. So soon as the gradually surging revolt of the working-class compelled Parliament to shorten compulsorily the hours of la- bour, and to begin by imposing a normal working-day on factories proper, so soon consequently as an increased production of surplus- value by the prolongation of the working-day was once for all put a stop to, from that moment capital threw itself with all its might into the production of relative surplus-value, by hasten- ing on the further improvement of machinery. The bedroom is a garret; the walls run together into the roof like a sugar-loaf, a dormer-win- dow opening in front. lj-d. Dans cette direction, l'espece humaine s'eleve aux plus hautes conceptions du genie, penetre dans les profondeurs myste- rieuses de la religion, etablit les principes salutaires de la morale (which consists in 's'approprier tous les bienfaits,' &c), les lois tutelaires de la li- berte (liberty of 'les classes condamnees a produire?') et du pouvoir, de l'obe- issance et de la justice, du devoir et de l'humanite." For this twaddle see "Des Systemes d'Economie Politique. or of 100 x 3 working-hours. III. And consequently the owners of commodities are distinguishable only as sellers, those who own commodities, and buyers, those who own money. The Bank Charter Act of 1844." Lond. Gomm.: "He would sign any petition for it" (legislative interference). Econ." edit. There is besides "a plague more horrible still, the great number of idiots." Now a word on the climatic conditions. Cf. Fourth Report (1865), 61, p. But, at the same time, every actual sum of money is limited in amount, and, therefore, as a means of purchasing, has only a limited efficacy. Since, on the other hand, no rise or fall in the value of an ounce of gold can alter its weight, no alteration can take place in the weight of its aliquot parts. "Oo y^P MMAei to 7cpaTT6jievov Ttjv Too irpdixovTo; a^oX-gv 7Upi|i«veiv, dXX' avaifXT) tov 7tpattovra tq> TrpaxTOiicvw iTraxoXoo&eiv jxyj h Tzapipyoo jitpet. In this inquiry the members of the committee themselves are the cross-exam- iners, and among them are to be found both mine-owners and mine exploiters; the witnesses are mostly working coal miners. While the labourer is at work, his labour constantly under- goes a transformation: from being motion, it becomes an object without motion; from being the labourer working, it becomes the thing produced. 1865.," pp 498-502, passim. 84-85.) In Scotland, the abolition of serfdom took place some centu- ries later than in England. In the 43rd year of her reign the nation was obliged to recognise pau- perism officially by the introduction of a poor-rate. The very essence of this form is that the material commodity itself — the coat — just as it is, expresses value, and is endowed with the form of value by Nature itself. I, p. These laws were then found, and really became, unnecessary and burdensome." (I. By a Well-wisher of Mankind. It is they that sweep away the handicraftsman's work as the regulating principle of social production. Mr. Wm. Roscher who seldom loses an occasion of registering, in black and white, ingenious apologetic fancies, records the following specimen: — "J. c, p. m., and left off about 9 p. Here, without furniture, huddled together were 3 adults and 5 children. Whoever directly satisfies his wants with the produce of his own labour, creates, indeed, use-values, but not commodities. The manufacturers had no need any longer to restrain themselves. 2. . ha ypr,|i2Tcov S<.a2oV?]<;). 1 "An Inquiry into the Connexion between the Present Price of Provi- sions, &c," pp. In each of these phases 1 "Avec de l'argent on achete des marchandises et avec des marchan- dises on achete de l'argent." (Merrier de la Riviere: "L'ordre naturel et es- sentiel des societes politiques," p. 141.) 2 One of the material bases of the power of the State over the small disconnected producing organisms in India, was the regulation of the water supply. 2. In the regular factories in which throughout piece-wages predominate, particular kinds of work are unsuitable to this form 1 "The system ot piece-work illustrates an epoch in the history of the working-man; it is halfway between the position of the mere day-labourer depending upon the will of the capitalist and the co-operative artisan, who in the not distant future promises to combine the artisan and the capitalist in his own person. If the hour's wage is fixed so that the capitalist does not bind himself to pay a day's or a week's wage, but only to pay wages for the hours during which he chooses to employ the labourer, he can employ him for a shorter time than that which is originally the basis of the calculation of the hour-wage, or the unit-measure of the price of labour. J. . The wage-worker of to- day is to-morrow an independent peasant, or artisan, working for himself. simple con- trivance for promoting the accumulation of capital," which, of course, since the time of Adam, floated in their imagination as the sole and final end of their existence: "they have divided them- selves into owners of capital and owners of labour .... 1734.) "Why not?" "I think it a more honourable occupation for them in the mills." (n. . In the for- mer, he acts as the motive power of capital, and belongs to the capitalist. 2 This progress in the rate of consumption ought to suffice for the most optimist of progressists, and for the biggest hawker of lies among the Free-trade bagmen of Germany. . The trick has at last succeeded; money has been converted into capital. Paris, 1857, p. The difference between the two processes is here reflected in their material factors, by the same instrument of production taking part as a whole in the labour- process, while at the same time as an element in the formation of value, it enters only by fractions. 53, seq. — now admit of the rapidest transforma- tion of masses of surplus-product into additional means of pro- duction. 2 Moreover, the formulse II. But the historical de- velopment of the antagonisms, immanent in a given form of pro- duction, is the only way in which that form of production can be dissolved and a new form established. (Ch. xv., sect. 1750, p. 6d. Daire's Edit, of "Economistes Financiers du XVIII. And be it enacted, that here- after no minor engaged in any factory shall be holden or required to work more than 10 hours in any day. 85.) 1 The over-worked "die off with strange rapidity; but the places of those who perish are instantly filled, and a frequent change of persons makes no alteration in the scene." ("England and America." London, 1833, vol. . Altogether, irrespective of the case of a rise of wages with a fall- ing price of labour, &c, such an increase only means at best a quantitative diminution of the unpaid labour that the worker has to supply. Independently of the limits of the actual increase of population, it creates, for the changing needs of the self-expansion of capital, a mass of human mate- rial always ready for exploitation. This relation has no natural basis, neither is its social basis one that is common to all historical periods. "I substitute," he proudly says, "for the word capital, considered as an instru- ment of production, the word abstinence." 3 An unparalleled 1 "An Inquiry into those Principles Respecting the Nature of Demand, &c," p. Where the transition is rapid, the effect is acute and felt by great masses. 18, 19. x The sum of the necessary labour and the surplus-labour, i.e., of the periods of time during which the workman replaces the value of his labour-power, and produces the surplus-value, this sum constitutes the actual time during which he works, i.e., the working-day. If, then, the control of the 1 "Profits ... Apart from the working-class movement that daily grew more threatening, the limiting of factory labour was dictated by the same necessity which spread guano over the English fields. The bones of the cotton- weavers are bleaching the plains of India." No doubt, in turning them out of this "temporal" world, the machinery caused them no more than "a temporary inconvenience." For the rest, since machin- ery is continually seizing upon new fields of production, its tem- porary effect is really permanent. With regard to the unusual exertions made by the labouring classes in periods of dearness, which produce the fall of wages noticed in the evidence" (namely, before the Parliamentary Committee of Inquiry, 1814-15), "they are most meritorious in the individ- uals, and certainly favour the growth of capital. Mathematicians and mechanicians, and in this they are fol- lowed by a few English economists, call a tool a simple machine, and a machine a complex tool. 2 "The slavery in which the bourgeoisie has bound the proletariat, comes nowhere more plainly into daylight than in the factory system. 2 4 6 (9.) Kent Kennington, very seriously over-populated in 1859, when diph- theria appeared, and the parish doctor instituted a medical inquiry into the condition of the poorer classes. Vanderlint, 1. It becomes a question of life and death for society to adapt the mode of production to the normal functioning of this law. If the bushel of wheat should cost 1 Postlethwayt, 1. . The only remedy that I, a republican on principle, can sug- gest, is to restore the old state of serfdom, to make slaves of all those who are unable to provide for their own subsistence." Eden, I.e., Book 1., ch. By the side of independent pro- ducers who carry on their handicrafts and agriculture in the tradi- tional old-fashioned way, there stands the usurer or the merchant, with his usurer's capital or merchant's capital, feeding on them like a parasite. We get light work done by gangs." 1 The soil requires much light field labour, such as weeding, hoeing, certain processes of manur- ing, removing of stones, &c. Tor- por seized them. 1854.— 1 in 17. Finally, it is a systematic process, which does not simply make a passing gap in the population, but sucks out of it every year more people than are replaced by the births, so that the ab- solute level of the population falls year by year. The time tak- en in passing from one stage to another is shortened, so is the la- bour that effectuates this passage. Dr. Ballard gives it as the general opinion of the whole body of medical officers in London, that 300 cubic feet is the minimum space proper for each person in a bedroom or workroom. . . 555.) 4 R. m., in making up. Wages is a category that, as yet, has no existence at the present stage of our investigation. Let the working-day be 12 hours. If one working-hour be embodied in sixpence, and the value of a day's labour-power be five shillings, the labourer must work 10 hours a day, in order to replace the value paid by capital for his labour-power, or to produce an equivalent for the value of his daily necessary means of subsistence. to 6 p. 5) Domestic Workshops, where only members of the family are employed, in the family dwelling: still more elastic regulations and simultaneously the restriction that the inspector may, without special permission of the ministry or a court, enter only rooms not used also for dwelling purposes; and lastly unrestricted freedom for straw-plaiting and lace- and glove-making by mem- bers of the family. Here, the one stands forth in its character of value by reason of its relation to the other. A working-man's living and prospects depend so much upon his fingers, that any loss of them is a very serious matter to him. c , p. &.c, Par M. If on the one hand the process be not carried beyond the point, where the value paid by the capitalist for the labour-power is replaced by an exact equivalent, it is simply a process of producing value; if, on the other hand, it be continued beyond that point, it be- comes a process of creating surplus-value. COMMODITIES 39 Some people might think that if the value of a commodity is determined by the quantity of labour spent on it, the more idle and unskilful the labourer, the more valuable would his commodity be, because more time would be required in its pro- duction. it is carried into the Tower, and coined. The payment of 300 workmen at once, though only for one day, requires a greater outlay of capital, than does the payment of a smaller number of men, week by week, during a whole year. On the other hand, these men, suddenly dragged from their wonted mode of life, could not as suddenly adapt them- selves to the discipline of their new condition. The unspeakable misery of the French agricultural population under Louis XIV., a misery so eloquently denounced by Boisguillebert, Marshal Vauban, and others, was due not only to the weight of the taxes, but also to the conversion of taxes in kind into money taxes. Its fall and the vic- tory of the proletariat are equally inevitable... The official inspectors sum up the material condition of the agricultural labourer as follows: "Though living with the strictest frugality, his own wages are barely sufficient to provide food for an ordinary family and pay his rent, and he depends upon other sources for the means of clothing himself, his wife, and children. Money, the final term of the first transmutation, is at the same time the starting-point for the second. Its fragments fall to various categories of persons, and take various forms, independent the one of the other, such as profit, interest, merchants' profit, rent, &c. The decisively revolutionary machine, the machine which attacks in an equal degree the whole of the num- berless branches of this sphere of production, dressmaking, tailor- 1 In England millinery and dressmaking are tor the most part carried on, on the premises of the employer, partly by workwomen who live there, partly by women who live off the premises. Leach deposes: "Last winter six out of nineteen girls were away from ill-health at one time from over-work. The first is the identification of the circulation of com- modities with the direct barter of products, by simple abstraction from their points of difference: the second is, the attempt to explain away the contradic- tions of capitalist production, by reducing the relations between the persons engaged in that mode of production, to the simple relations arising out of the circulation of commodities. To them, their own social action takes the form of tjie action of objects, which rule the producers instead of being ruled by them. 2,607,153 ts. If the labourer receives 3s., then he receives the value of his labour- power functioning through 12 hours. To what extent this transformation depends upon the general conditions of pro- duction, is shown, to take one example, by the fact that the Roman Empire twice failed in its attempt to levy all contributions in money. These dates depend, apart from other revolutions in the wheel of reproduction, on conditions closely connected with the seasons. 108, 4 George Read, 1. But when people plun- der for centuries, there must always be something at hand fof them to seize, the objects of plunder must be continually reproduced. 1865 £. 2 The gang-system obtains almost exclusively in the counties of Lincoln, Huntingdon, Cambridge, Norfolk, Suffolk, and Not- tingham, here and there in the neighbouring counties of North- ampton, Bedford, and Rutland. DIVISION OF LABOUR AND MANUFACTURE 365 with a given quantity of labour, and, consequently, of cheapen- ing commodities and hurrying on the accumulation of capital. THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 623 This diminution in the variable part of capital as compared with the constant, or the altered value-composition of the capital, however, only shows approximately the change in the composi- tion of its material constituents. Hence, it is plain, the labourer, in our example, works one half of the day for himself, the other half for the capitalist. If each of these 24 men gives only one hour of sur- plus-labour in 12, the 24 men give together 24 hours of surplus-la- bour, while 24 hours is the total labour of the two men. 7.) "The interest of trade requires, that corn and all provisions should be as cheap as possible; for whatever makes them dear, must make labour dear also ... "It would be desirable the inspectors should come oftener?" "Yes, and without being sent for." (n. 1 As a general law it follows that, given the amount of daily, weekly labour, &c, the daily or weekly wages depend on the price of labour which itself varies either with the value of labour- power, or with the difference between its price and its value. But it can also be accompanied by very barbarian notions, more especially in the heads of those who are as much interested, prac- tically, in the process of making value beget value, as they are in misunderstanding that process theoretically. Wool was formerly combed by hand, most frequently in the cottage of the comber. 129 sq.) 72 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION from this form itself. The circuit M— C— M', buying in order to sell dearer, is seen most clearly in genuine merchants' capital. is not a freeman, nor is he a slave; he is a pauper." 4 The time just before the repeal of the Corn Laws threw new light on the condition of the agricultural labourers. 140. That which in the labourer ap- peared as movement, now appears in the product as a fixed quality without motion. 1 It is thus, that for the first time, this value shows itself in its true light as a congelation of un- differentiated human labour. With those, for example, whose value rises, simultaneously with, and proportionally to, that of money, there is no alteration in price. 1 In a given society the limit would be reached only when the entire social capital was united in the hands of either a single capitalist or a single capitalist company. In a certain tile-field at Mosley, e.g., a young woman, 24 years of age, was in the habit of making 2,000 tiles a day, with the assistance of 2 little girls, who carried the clay for her, and stacked the tiles. 1 In the circuit G — M — G, the same piece of money changes its place twice. Lastly, the extraordinary productiveness of modern indus- try, accompanied as it is by both a more extensive and a more intense exploitation of labour-power in all other spheres of pro- duction, allows of the unproductive employment of a larger and larger part of the working-class, and the consequent reproduction, on a constantly extending scale, of the ancient domestic slaves under the name of a servant class, including men-servants, wom- en-servants, lackeys, &c. . 28. These incomes liable to taxation in England, Wales and Scotland, amounted in 1864 to £95,844,222, in 1865 to £105,435, 5'79. It forms a disposable industrial reserve army, that belongs to capital quite as absolutely as if the latter had bred it at its own cost. The production of relative surplus-population has more than kept pace with the absolute depopulation. Formerly they were filled with women and children, now machinery seems to do all the work. This property of a commodity is independent of the amount of labour required to appropriate its useful qualities. THE ABSTINENCE THEORY In the last preceding chapter, we treated surplus-value (or the surplus-product) solely as a fund for supplying the individual consumption of the capitalist. Partie, Paris, 1846, p. He must pay higher prices, and is in fact tied to the shop which gives him credit Thus at Horningham in Wilts for example, where the wages are monthly, the same flour that he could buy elsewhere at Is lOd per stone, costs him 2s 4d per stone, ('bixtn Report" on "Public Health" by "The Medical Officer ot the Privy Council, &c 1864 " p 264.) "The block printers of Paisley and Kilmarnock entorced, bv a strike, fortnightly, instead of monthly payment ot wages." ("Reports of the Injectors of Factories for 31st Oct., 1853," p 34.) As a further pretty result of the credit given by the workmen to the capitalist, we may reler to the method current in many English coal mines, where the labourer is not paid till the end of the month, and in the meantime, receives sums on account from the capitalist, often in goods for which the miner is obliged to pay more than the market price (Truck-system). In the finished product the labour by means of which it has acquired its useful qualities is not palpable, has apparently vanished. 1861. c, note 2.) e The details given at the end of Part IV. The late cotton crisis also furnished edifying examples of the sagacity shown by the factory autocrats in making deductions from wages. It is owing to this fact, that the production of the new value of three shillings takes the semblance of a mere reproduction. Take, for instance, the fattening of cattle, where the animal is the raw material, and at the same time an instrument for the production of manure. 9-10. THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 615 prudence to relieve, but folly to cure. c, p. It is a historical relation of production." (Karl Marx, "Lohnarbeit und Kapital." A. 114, n. The general value-form is the reduction of all kinds of actual labour to their common character of being human labour generally, of being the expendi- ture of human labour-power. The suppression of the monasteries, &c, hurled their inmates into the proletariat. As soon as capitalist production takes possession of agri- culture, and in proportion to the extent to which it does so, the demand for an agricultural labouring population falls absolutely, while the accumulation of the capital employed in agriculture advances, without this repulsion being, as in non-agricultural industries, compensated by a greater attraction. I, 1. c, pp. Of course, this does not prevent such a change of form from producing great technical alterations in the mechanism that was originally constructed to be 1 Moses says: "Thou shalt not muzzle the ox that treads the corn." The Christian philanthropists of Germany, on the contrary, fastened a wooden board round, the necks of the serfs, whom they used as a motive power for grinding, in order to prevent them from putting flour into their mouths with their hands. That he was a skilled factory hand, may be understood when I say that he was employed on goods for the Man- chester market. 168). . Rep.," p. "The agricultural labourers' huts," an inspector cries out, "are a disgrace to the Christianity and to the civilisation of this country." 1 In order to increase the attractions of these holes for the labourers, the pieces of land belonging thereto from time immemorial, are systematically confiscated. 2 1. m. 127. . Every trader knows, that he his right to a certain portion of the common produce destined for consumption. 2 "Pauper ubique jacet," cried Queen Elizabeth, after a journey through England. Assuming that labour-power is paid for at its value, we are confronted by this alternative: given the productiveness of labour and its normal intensity, the rate of surplus-value can be raised only by the actual prolongation of the working-day; on the other hand, given the length of the working-day, that rise can be effected only by a change in the relative magnitudes of the components of the working-day, viz., necessary labour and sur- plus-labour; a change which, if the wages are not to fall below the- value of labour-power, pre-supposes a change either in the produc- tiveness or in the intensity of the labour. of Fact.," 31st October, 1848, p. Even in the middle of the eight- eenth century, the Rev. The manufactures of this class owed their origin chiefly to the capitalist's need of having at hand an army ready equipped to meet any increase of de- mand. 531 CHAPTER XVIII VARIOUS FORMULA FOR THE RATE OF SURPLUS-VALUE We have seen that the rate of surplus-value is represented by the following formulae. They give up to the product that value alone which they themselves lose as means of production. Of course, this development of productive power is accompanied by a partial depreciation of functioning capital. x On the same subject Mr. E. The inter- mediate pauses are shortened, in which accumulation works as simple extension of production, on a given technical basis. The next termination of the cycle was due in 1866. The cost of keeping the family increases, and balances the greater income. We pass it over, however, for the present. s.d. s.d. s.d. 2 4 8 — 8 2 6 1 6 3 5 8 — 8 1 6 6 6 1 3 1 /, 2 4 8 — 8 1 7 1 9 2 4 8 — 8 1 7 1 9 6 8 7 l/-,l/6, 10 6 2 8 6 i o»; 4 3 5 7 1/-.2/- 7 1 4 5 8 l IV, SECOND VILLAGE s. But beyond this point the wear and tear in- creases in geometrical progression, and every condition suitable for the normal reproduction and functioning of labour-power is suppressed. One or other of the two must yield. Man's reflections on the forms of social life, and consequently, also, his scientific analysis of those forms, take a course directly opposite to that of their actual historical development. were it not for the small owners, would, for by far the most part, have to sleep under the trees of the farms on which they work." (1. They thus, in fact, declare that consumption and other lung diseases among the workpeople are necessary conditions to the existence of capital. The chief objection, repeatedly and passionately urged on behalf of each manufacture threatened with the Factory Act, is in fact this, that in order to continue the business on the old scale a greater outlay of capital will be necessary. 2 These formulae, which 1 The insufficiency of Ricardo's analysis of the magnitude of value, and his analysis is by far the best, will appear from the 3rd and 4th books of this work. 3 The Act of 1844 certainly "robbed" them of the "liberty" of employing children under 11 longer than 6— hours a day. . The ancients therefore denounced money as subversive of the economic and moral order of things. c, 284., p. . Here then he sets himself systematically to work to form an industrial reserve force that shall be ready at a moment's notice; during one part of the year he decimates this force by the most inhuman toil, during the other part, he lets it starve for want of work. iv., p. Capitalistic appropriation and personal appropriation, whether of science or of material wealth, are, however, MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 387 for the purposes of telegraphy, &c, necessitates a costly and ex- tensive apparatus. "(W. 379,213 451,569 401,064 Hence, between 1861 and 1868, 338 cotton factories disap- peared, in other words more productive machinery on a larger scale was concentrated in the hands of a smaller number of cap- italists. 2 The fact that money can, in certain functions, be replaced by mere symbols of itself, gave rise to that other mistaken notion, that it is itself a mere symbol. more than on weekly wages, yet it is found, on calculating his total income, that his loss of employ- ment, during the year, outweighs this gain... 1 With the national debt arose an international credit system, which often conceals one of the sources of primitive accumula- tion in this or that people. m. EXPORT OF CORN, &c, FROM THE UNITED STATES TO GREAT BRITAIN. 4 The trades proposed to be brought under the Act were the following: Lace-making, stocking-weaving, straw-plaiting, the manufacture of wear- ing apparel with its numerous sub-divisions, artificial flower-making, shoe- making, hat-making, glove-making, tailoring, all metal works, from blast furnaces down to needleworks, &c, paper-mills, glass-works, tobacco fac- tories, india-rubber works, braid-making (for weaving), hand-carpet-mak- ing, umbrella and parasol making, the manufacture of spindles and spools, letter-press printing, book-binding, manufacture of stationery (including paper bags, cards, coloured paper, &c), rope-making, manufacture of jet ornaments, brick-making, silk manufacture by hand, Coventry weaving, salt works, tallow chandlers, cement works, sugar refineries, biscuit -making, various industries connected with timber, and other mixed trades. There the movements of the instrument of labour proceed from him, here it is the move- ments of the machine that he must follow. The change in the quantity of the circulating medium is, in this case, it is true, caused by the money itself, vet not in virtue of its function as a medium of circulation, but of its function as a measure of value. Since the value in which a day's labour is embodied, increases with the length of that day, it is evident that the surplus-value and the price of labour-power may simultaneously increase, ei- ther by equal or unequal quantities. A Princess is a man." William Turner, age 12 — "Don't live in England. When com- paring the mode of production of isolated peasants and artisans with production by slave-labour, the political economist counts this labour of superintendence among the faux frais of production. Here and there, long before the period of manufacture, and also, to some extent, during that period, these implements pass over into machines, but without creating any revolution in the mode of production. 628 "centralisation move- ment") the English text has been altered in conformity with the 4th German edition.— Ed. THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 627 But if the relative extension and energy of the movement towards centralisation is determined, in a certain degree, by the magni- tude of capitalist wealth and superiority of economic mechanism already attained, progress in centralisation does not in any way depend upon a positive growth in the magnitude of social capital. Roscher during two days, does more work than two needle- women employed together during one day. And how this price is deter- mined, is just the question. of tea =20 yards of linen, etc. The colonies secured a market for the budding manufactures, and, through the mo- nopoly of the market, an increased accumulation. The social division of labour causes his labour to be as one-sided as his wants are many-sided. etc.," t. The shameless lav- ishing of uncultivated colonial land on aristocrats and capitalists by the Government, so loudly denounced even by Wakefield, has produced, especially in Australia, * in conjunction with the stream of men that the gold-diggings attract, and with the competition that the importation of English commodities causes even to the smallest artisan, an ample "relative surplus labouring population," so that almost every mail brings the Job's news of a "glut of the 1 As soon as Australia became her own law-giver, she passed, oi course, laws favourable to the settlers, but the squandering of the land, already ac- complished by the English Government, stands in the way. It did not, therefore, affect children who could always be employed for half an hour before and 2 — hours after this period, provided the whole of their labour did 1 not exceed 6-^- hours. 449. 1 The specifically capitalist mode of production, the develop- ment of the productive power of labour corresponding to it, and the change thence resulting in the organic composition of capi- tal, do not merely keep pace with the advance of accumulation, or with the growth of social wealth. "The quantity of land assigned (in the old laws) would now be judged too great for labourers, and rather as likely to con- vert them into small farmers." (George Roberts: "The Social History of the People of the Southern Counties of England in Past Centuries." Lond., 1856, pp. 4 Robert Owen, soon after 1810, not only maintained the necessity of a limitation of the working-day in theory, but actually introduced the 10 hours' day into his factory at New Lanark. he may do great damage to the whole." 2 Hence throughout the whole manufacturing period there runs the complaint of want of discipline among the workmen. 2 1 The total area includes also peat, bogs, and waste land. The seller turned his commodity into money, in order thereby to satisfy some want; the hoarder did the same in order to keep his commodity in its money-shape, and the debtor in order to be able to pay; if he do not pay, his goods will be sold by the sheriff. It is very characteristic that the English Government for years practised this method of "primitive accumulation," pre- scribed by Mr. Wakefield expressly for the use of the colonies. 645, 1779.) "What is the feeling among the working miners as to the employment of women?" "I think they generally condemn it." (n. Division of labour with- in the workshop implies the undisputed authority of the capi- talist over men, that are but parts of a mechanism that belongs to him. Horner, Inspector of Factories," in Factories Regulation Acts. COTTON Cotton yarn . Hence, what the capitalist sets the labourer to pro- duce, is a particular use-value, a specified article. profit is derived from the labour of the capitalist, and interest from his asceticism, in other words, from his "abstinence." The dodge was an old one, but the word "abstinence" was new. Means of production which already belong to the latter are then transformed by him, with the aid of labour equally belonging to him, into a new product which is likewise lawfully his. The former difference increases with the latter, but in a smaller degree. They, on the con trary, imagine that they are subjects because he is king. In con- trast with the manufacturing period, the division of labour is thenceforth based, wherever possible, on the employment of women, of children of all ages, and of unskilled labourers, in one word, on cheap labour, as it is characteristically called in England. 22, and xi. 2 "Sophisms of Free Trade." By a Barrister. 2 Babbage estimates that in Java the spinning labour alone adds 117% to the value of the cotton. It is merely a question of extra hands and extra outlay. d. Money that circulates in the latter manner is thereby transformed into, becomes capital, and is already potentially capital. 1850. The Bank of England began with lending its money to the Government at 8%; at the same time it was empowered by Parliament to coin money out of the same capital, by lending it again to the public in the form of bank- notes. 3, the justices of the peace were empowered to fix certain wages and to modify them according to the time of the year and the price of commodities. They found allies in the Tories panting for revenge. Just as in the former the labour-process figures but as a means towards the self-expansion of capital, so in the latter it figures but as a means of reproducing as capital— i.e., as self-expanding val- ue,— the value advanced. reminds one of the secret revolutionary associations which prepared the French peo- ple for the events of 1789.... 60. 2, 3. 2 "Que Tune de ces deux valeurs soit argent, ou qu'elles soient toutes deux marchandises usuelles, rien de plus indifferent en soi." ("Mercier de la Riviere," 1. . But every year a part of these instruments of labour perishes or reaches the CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO CAPITAL 605 limit of its productive function. "Mankind have adopted a . m., was forbidden for all persons between 9 and 18. Answer: the difficulty is met by calling use-value, exchange-value, if you please. In the market he stood as owner of the commodity "labour-power" face to face with other owners of commodities, dealer against dealer. Yet evidently it is only in a qualified sense that the work can be deemed self-supporting And on a very large scale the nominal self-support can be only a circuit, longer or shorter, to pauperism." l The intimate connexion between the pangs of hunger of the most industrious layers of the working-class, and the extravagant consumption, coarse or refined, of the rich, for which capitalist accumulation is the basis, reveals itself only when the economic laws are known. This "liberalism," so full of consideration for "capital," was the more noteworthy as, Dr. Farre, Sir A. This quantity is expressed by the value of the commodity, and since the value is reckoned in money of account, this quantity is also expressed by the price, which we will suppose to be £10. How long a time? It is with the political economist as with the feudal jurist. The relative magnitude of the accumulation-fund may even increase at the expense of the consumption-fund, whilst the cheapening of commodities places at the disposal of the capitalist as many means of enjoyment as for- merly, or even more than formerly. There may therefore be undercurrent causes for such extraordinary exhibitions as strikes, not only wherever they arise, but par- ticularly at such times as the present, which without explanation, render them inexplicable to the public understanding." He alludes here to a strike of power-loom weavers at Darwen, June, 1863. At the same time, the money paid for the purchase of the la- bour-power, is converted into necessaries, that are consumed, not by "productive labour," but by the "productive labourer." Adam Smith, by a fundamentally perverted analysis, arrives at the absurd conclusion, that even though each individual capital is di- vided into a constant and a variable part, the capital of society resolves itself only into variable capital, i.e., is laid out exclu- sively in payment of wages. The equation, 20 yards of linen =1 coat, or 20 yards of linen are worth one coat, implies that the same quantity of value-sub- stance (congealed labour) is embodied in both; that the two com- modities have each cost the same amount of labour of the same quantity of labour-time. .1.6 From the movement of population and the agricultural prod- uce of Ireland, we pass to the movement in the purse of its land- lords, larger farmers, and industrial capitalists. 25.) The author of this admirable work is the Th. Hodgskin 1 have already cited. . To carry on the trade as a manufacture, with concentration of work- men, is, in the watch trade, profitable only under exceptional con- ditions, because competition is greater between the labourers who desire to work at home, and because the splitting up of the work into a number of heterogeneous processes, permits but little use of the instruments of labour in common, and the capitalist, by scat- tering the work, saves the outlay on workshops, &c. Par le Dr. A. Whether the change in the price corre- spond to an actual change of value in the commodities, or whether it be the result of mere fluctuations in market-prices, the effect on the quantity of the medium of circulation remains the same. 718.) "Do you think that in this country any law that you pass . Its existence is the result of a special sort of productive activity, the nature of which is determined by its aim, mode of operation, subject, means, and result. e., no longer immedi- ately necessary for the self-expansion of capital, either goes to the wall in the unequal contest of the old handicrafts and manufac- tures with machinery, or else floods all the more easily accessible branches of industry, swamps the labour-market, and sinks the price of labour-power below its value. It frequently happens that he finds has gone too fast, that breakages and bad work more than counterbalance the increased speed, and that he is obliged to slack- en his pace. 8 The whole history of the development of machinery can be traced in the history of the corn mill. I therefore concluded, that as an active and intel- ligent mill-owner would find out the safe maximum, it would not be possible to produce as much in eleven hours as in twelve. All the relations between Robinson and the objects that form this wealth of his own creation, are here so simple and clear as to be intelligible without exertion, even to Mr. Sedley Taylor. * In such cases the effect of the combined labour could either not be pro- duced at all by isolated individual labour, or it could only be pro- duced by a great expenditure of time, or on a very dwarfed scale. Rep.," p. (Economic not Chrematistic has a limit... One article must be bought or paid for daily, another weekly, another quarterly, and so on. * No branch of industry in England (we do not take into account the making of bread by machinery recently introduced) has preserved up to the present day a method of production so archaic, so — as we see from the poets of the Roman Em- pire — pre-christian, as baking. 2 The increase in the price of labour with the extension of the working- day beyond a certain normal limit, takes such a shape in various British industries that the low price of labour during the so-called normal time compels the labourer to work during the better paid over-time, if he wishes to obtain a sufficient wage at all. But it has never once asked the question why labour is represented by the value of its product and labour- time by the magnitude of that value. 6. The expropriation of the immediate producers was accomplished with merciless Vandalism, and under the stimulus of passions the most in- famous, the most sordid, the pettiest, the most meanly odi ous. "1 look around and not a house is to be seen but mine. The occupation, instinctive almost as a portion of human art, unobjectionable as a branch of human industry, is made by mere excess of work, the destroyer of the man. The values of these commodities are, therefore, changed in imagination into so many different quantities of gold. But it is different with commodities. The basis of the old meth- od, sheer brutality in the exploitation of the workpeople, accom- panied more or less by a systematic division of labour, no longer sufficed for the extending markets and for the still more rapidly extending competition of the capitalists. Now, gen- tlemen, if you compare the working-time you pay for, with that which you do not pay for, you will find that they are to one an- other, as half a day is to half a day; this gives a rate of 100%, and 228 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION a very pretty percentage it is. The prolongation of the surplus-labour would cor- respond to a shortening of the necessary labour; or a portion of the labour-time previously consumed, in reality, for the labourer's own benefit, would be converted into labour-time for the benefit of the capitalist. Arledge, senior physician of the North Staffordshire Infirmary, says: "The potters as a class, both men and women, represent a degenerated population, both physically and morally. By this form, commodities are, for the first time, effectively brought into relation with one another as values, or made to appear as exchange-values. 3 Still these are exceptions in antiquity. to 9s. To similar tender scruples of the glass manufac- turers that regular meal-times for the children are impossible because as a consequence a certain quantity of heat, radiated by the furnaces, would be 'a pure loss" or "wasted," Commissioner White makes answer. The labour- power of each individual, by its very nature, operates in this case merely as a definite portion of the whole labour-power of the fam- ily, and therefore, the measure of the expenditure of individual labour-power by its duration, appears here by its very nature as a social character of their labour. If we keep in view the material fact alone that a commodity has been exchanged for gold, we overlook the very thing that we ought to observe — namely, what has happened to the form of the commodity. At the head is the gang-master, always an ordinary agricultural labourer, generally what is called a bad lot, a scapegrace, unsteady, drunken, but with a dash of enterprise and savoir faire. 46,673 1,594 Wales . There were mules and steam-engines before there were any labourers, whose exclusive occupation it was to make mules and steam-engines; just as men wore clothes before there were such people as tailors. The value of money being assumed to be constant, an average so- cial working-day of 12 hours always produces the same new value, six shillings, no matter how this sum may be apportioned between surplus-value and wages. . . 48. 5. c, p. The division of labour within the society brings into con- tact independent commodity-producers, who acknowledge no oth- er authority but that of competition, of the coercion exerted by the pressure of their mutual interests; just as in the animal kingdom, the bellum omnium contra omnes more or less preserves the condi- tions of existence of every species. The work is therefore re-distributed. u . 215, 216.) 730 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION all their fields turned into pasturage. 745 CHAPTER XXX REACTION OF THE AGRICULTURAL REVOLUTION ON INDUSTRY. All is not service and benefit to a neighbour that is called service and benefit. 4 It says, "But if it should seem fit to Parliament to place the whole of that large number of children, young persons and females under the protec- tive legislation above adverted to. They give regular and official statistics of the capitalistic greed for surplus-labour. 2 The towns of Asia Minor thus paid a yearly money tribute to ancient Rome. Complaints were at length made to the Nuisances Removal Committee by a medical gentleman who had occasion to visit these huts, and he spoke of their condition as dwellings in the most severe terms, and he expressed his fears that some very serious consequences might ensue, unless some sanitary measures were adopted. 218 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION surplus-value is determined by the surplus portion of the work- ing-day, it follows that surplus-value bears the same ratio to variable capital, that surplus-labour does to necessary labour, or in other words, the rate of surplus-value -= surplus " la 1 b ? Engels, 1. In agri- culture as in manufacture, the transformation of production under the sway of capital, means, at the same time, the martyr- dom of the producer; the instrument of labour becomes the means of enslaving, exploiting, and impoverishing the labourer; the social combination and organisation of labour-processes is turned into an organised mode of crushing out the workman's individual vitality, freedom, and independence. They contract as free agents, and the agreement they come to, is but the form in which they give legal expression to their common will. For the second arrest for vagabondage the whipping is to be repeated and half the ear sliced off; but for LEGISLATION AGAINST THE EXPROPRIATED 735 the third relapse the offender is to be executed as a hardened criminal and enemy of the common weal. England thereby acquired the right of supplying Spanish America until 1743 with 4,800 negroes yearly. And now Hussey Vivian (himself an exploiter of mines) asks: "Would not the opinion of the workman depend upon the poverty of the workman's family?" Mr. Bruce: "Do you not think it would be a very hard case, where a parent had been injured, or where he was sickly, or where a father was dead, and there was only a mother, to prevent a child between 12 and 14 earning Is. 7d. On the contrary, their value is expressed in its value. c, Vol. 2d., and the surplus-value consequently not rise above 3s. 2 1 Harrison in his "Description of England," says "although peradven- ture foure pounds of old rent be improved to fortie, toward the end of his term, if he have not six or seven yeares rent lieng by him, fiftie or a hundred pounds, yet will the farmer thinke his gaines verie small." 2 On the influence of the depreciation of money in the 16th century, on the different classes of society, see "A Compendious or Briefe Examina- tion of Certayne Ordinary Complaints of Divers of our Countrymen in these our Days." By W. would be attended with no advantage; ... 760 " soldier " 1,473 " "405 " prisoner " 1,112 " " 44 "We see that few labouring families can reach, we will not say the average of the sailor or soldier, but even that of the prisoner. iNow, sir, fancy his astonishment on being paid 6—- days for the whole. While they fail to do this, their mere existence causes a relative loss to the capitalist, for they represent during the time they lie fallow, a useless advance of capital. But even in such case, the fall in the value of labour-power would cause a corre- sponding rise of surplus-value, and thus the abyss between the labourer's position and that of the capitalist would keep widening. The Act of 1833 declares the ordinary factory working-day to be from half-past five in the morning to half-past eight in the evening, and within these limits, a period of 15 hours, it is law- ful to employ young persons (i.e., persons between 13 and 18 years of age), at any time of the day, provided no one individual young person should work more than 12 hours in any one day, except in certain cases especially provided for. It not only stands with its feet on the ground, but, in relation to all other commodities, it stands on its head, and evolves out of its wooden brain grotesque ideas, far more wonderful than "table-turning" ever was. the landowner, and say if there could be any suggestion more suicidal to all classes of the country than by enfeebling a nation by exporting the best of its manufacturing population, and destroying the value of some of its most productive 1 It will not be forgotten that this same capital sings quite another song, under ordinary circumstances, when there is a question of reducing wages. Needlework, in the main, ... That is to say, the mechanism of capitalistic production so manages matters that the absolute increase of capi- tal is accompanied by no corresponding rise in the general demand for labour. 1009.) With much more naivete, Pinto, the Pindar of the Amsterdam Stock Exchange, remarks, "Le commerce est un jeu: (taken from Locke) et ce n'est pas avec des gueux qu'on peut gagner. Machinery, like every other component of constant capital, creates no new value, but yields up its own value to the product that it serves to beget. During such periods the operatives increase in number. The class-struggles of the ancient world took the form chiefly of a contest between debtors and creditors, which in Rome ended in the ruin of the plebeian debtors. Turks, soldiers, and tyrants are also bad men, yet must they let the people live, and confess that they are bad, and enemies, and do, nay, must, now and then show pity to some. to the time of George II., the history of money in England consists of one long series of perturbations caused by the clashing of the legally fixed ratio between the values of gold and silver, with the fluctuations in their real values. m. To children who are born under its curse, it must often be a very baptism into infamy. The remaining 2-23rds, that is, the last two of the twenty-three half-hours of every day, produce the net profit of 10 per cent. 1866," p. In the hardware manufactures of Birmingham and the neigh- 'Ch. Empl. m., and the child might not appear at school again for several days, when it would attend from 3 p. Smith: "Wealth of Nations," bk. It belongs to the clothes merchant. In this coun- ty, the farmer, contrary to the custom elsewhere, rents only such farms as have on them labourers' cottages. Its movement therefore represents nothing but the continued alternation of the inverse phases of the metamorphosis G— M— C, phases in which commodi- ties confront their value-forms, only to disappear again immedi- ately. Mr. L. 15.9 Bere 1 Rye J 8,894 10,091 1,197 i Bere, . s. Persons. 4 "What money is more than of absolute necessity for a Home Irade, is dead stock ... . . . But in fact, the term £90 var. The cheapness of commodities depends, ceteris paribus, on the productiveness of labour, and this again on the scale of production. Say (Traite, t. 1 The treatment of the aborigines was, naturally, most fright- ful in plantation-colonies destined for export trade only, such as the West Indies, and in rich and well-populated countries, such as Mexico and India, that were given over to plunder. 2 Malthus, "Principles of Political Economy/' pp. 13.) "The effect of the Fact. is contained in 20 ibs. 3 "It is self-evident, that, amid the ebbings and flowings of the markets and the alternate expansions and contractions of demand, occasions will constantly recur, in which the manufacturer may employ additional floating capital without employing additional fixed capital ... That the latter has laid out his capital in a teaching factory, instead of in a sausage factory, does not alter the relation. "The lawsof commerce are the laws of Nature, and therefore the laws of God." (E. l Of course, the composition of this tribunal was in itself a violation of the law. 317.) This last apologetic phrase Ure himself again cancels. We worked last winter till 9 (evening), and the winter before till 10. With this money Rome purchased from them commodities, and purchased them too dear. . * Ure, 1. Accumulation of capital is, therefore, increase of the proletariat. However, about that time, or a little later, the traders had got money beforehand, and began to build modern brick houses, in- stead of those of wood and plaster." Even in the early part of the 18th century, a Manchester manufacturer, who placed a pint of foreign wine before his guests, exposed himself to the remarks and headshakings of all his neighbours. The expropriation of the agricultural producer, of the peasant, from the soil, is the basis of the whole process. m. 2 A point that Sir James Steuart emphasises. 1 10 Hardy Street, No. 17 . Franklin, &c," edited by Sparks. — It may be seen from this how favourably Marx judged his predecessors, whenever he found in them real progress, or new and sound ideas. But where do you come from, then? It forms now a part of the constant capital of the master manufacturer. The continuous chain of payments, or retarded first metamorphoses, is essentially different from that interlacing of the series of metamorphoses which we considered on a former page. The possession of slaves brought them great gain, inasmuch as these, on account of their immunity from military service, could freely multiply and have a multitude of children. Here the surplus- population exists in the floating form. 125.) According to him, Urquhart himself is one of the chief agents in the ruin of Turkey, where he had made Free-trade propaganda in the English interest. But of all diseases they are especially prone to chest- disease, to pneumonia, phthisis, bronchitis, and asthma. From the point of view, however, of the capitalist who employs these 12 men, the working- day is that of the whole dozen. Finally, the substitution of the steam-engine for man gives in this, as in all similar revolutions, the finishing blow. 196,208. This is not the case on the universal market, whose integral parts are the indi- vidual countries. On the other hand, that part of capital, represented by labour-power, does, in the process of production, undergo an alteration of value. As to the increasing dependence ol la- bourers on the retail shopkeepers, this is the consequence of the frequent oscillations and interruptions of their employment. The labour-process, resolved as above into its simple elemen- tary factors, is human action with a view to the production of use-values, appropriation of natural substances to human re- quirements; it is the necessary condition for effecting exchange 184 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION of matter between man and Nature; it is the everlasting Nature- imposed condition of human existence, and therefore is inde- pendent of every social phase of that existence, or rather, is com- mon to every such phase. . 521.) 336 CHAPTER XIV DIVISION OF LABOUR AND MANUFACTURE SECTION 1.— TWO-FOLD ORIGIN OF MANUFACTURE That co-operation which is based on division of labour, assumes its typical form in manufacture, and is the prevalent character- istic form of the capitalist process of production throughout the manufacturing period properly so called. c, p. All that concerns it is simply and solely the maximum of labour-power, that can be rendered fluent in a working-day. What effect was produced on their contemporaries by the sudden uprising of this brood of bankocrats, financiers, rentiers, brokers, stock-jobbers, &c, is proved by the writings of that time, e.g., by Bolingbroke's. The resulting increased productive power is owing either to an increased expend- iture of labour-power in a given time— i.e., to increased inten- sity of labour — or to a decrease in the amount of labour-power unproductively consumed. 2 The decrease of the middle-class farmers can be seen especially in the census category: "Farmer's son, grandson, brother, nephew, daughter, grand-daughter, sister, niece"; in a word, the members of his own family, em- ployed by the farmer. MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OF COMMODITIES 143 Money of the world serves as the universal medium of pay- ment, as the universal means of purchasing, and as the univer- sally recognised embodiment of all wealth. Strike for 8 months, and great misery at Preston; 1854 prosperity, glutted markets; 1855 news of failures stream in from the United States, Canada, and the Eastern markets; 1856 great prosperity; 1857 crisis; 1858 improvement; 1859 great prosperity, increase in factories; 1860 Zenith of the English cotton trade, the Indian, Australian, and other markets so glutted with goods that even in 1863 they had not absorbed the whole lot; the French Treaty of Commerce, enormous growth of factories and machinery; 1861 prosperity continues for a time, reaction, the American Civil War, cotton famine; 1862 to 1863 complete collapse. Tin and copper-mining: 1851, 31,360: 1861, 32,041. Meanwhile, the advance of capitalistic production in Europe, accompanied by increasing Government pressure, has rendered Wakefield's recipe superfluous. Herr Roscher translates it rightly by "Enthaltung." Some of his countrymen, the Browns, Jones, and Robinsons, of Germany, not so well versed in Latin as he, have, monk-like, rendered it by "Entsagung" (renunciation). Nevertheless, in order to express the sugar- loaf as so much weight, we put it into a weight-relation with the iron. m. By the beginning of the 18th century the Dutch manufactures were far outstripped. 31st Oct., 1865," p. But the quantity of labour spent on its production has altered. Let the whole line a c, a b — c represent, for example, a working- day of 12 hours; the portion of a b 10 hours of necessary labour, and the portion b c 2 hours of surplus-labour. The battle of competition is fought by cheapening of commodities. Evidence, notes 479, 359, 27. The capitalistic form, on the con- trary, pre-supposes from first to last, the free wage-labourer, who sells his labour power to capital. The industrial reserve army, during the periods of stagnation and average prosperity, weighs down the active labour-army; during the periods of over-production and paroxysm, it holds its pretensions in check. . of Factories," April 30th, 1863, p. The total num- ber of moves made by all the circulating coins of one denomina- tion being given, we can arrive at the average number of moves made by a single coin of that denomination, or at the average velocity of the currency of money. (n. Their union into one single productive body and the establishment of a connexion between their individual functions, are matters foreign and external to them, are not their own act, but the act of the capital that brings and keeps them to- gether. Instead of the real fact, we have the false semblance of an association, in which labourer and capi- talist divide the product in proportion to the different elements which they respectively contribute towards its formation. Besides these, there still exist, in India and China, two distinct antique Asiatic forms of the same industry. Our capitalist, who is at home in his vulgar economy, ex- claims: "Oh! but I advanced my money for the express purpose of making more money." The way to Hell is paved with good inten- tions, and he might just as easily have intended to make money, without producing at all. If, therefore (prices remaining the same), the factory could be kept at work thirteen hours in- stead of eleven and a half, with an addition of about £2,600 to the circulating capital, the net profit would be more than doubled. Thus the solid crystal of their organisation, based on the old division of labour, becomes dis- solved, and makes way for constant changes. We could not well do without lads under 18 working by night. over the average of the other five days." ("Rep. If, now, this value of a day's labour-power is expressed as the value of a day's labour itself, we have the formula: Twelve hours' labour has a value of 3s. In this aspect the coat is a depository of value, but though worn to a thread, it does not let this fact show through. 2.) "The stock and riches of the kingdom cannot properly be confined to money, nor ought gold and silver to be excluded from being merchandise." ("The East-India Trade a Most Profitable Trade." London, 1677, p. c. c, p. The value of labour-power is determined, as in the case of every other commodity, by the labour-time necessary for the production, and consequently also the reproduction, of this 1 The capitalist epoch is therefore characterised by this, that labour power takes in the eyes of the labourer himself the form of a commodity which is his property; his labour consequently becomes wage-labour. At the same time in public meetings and in petitions to Par- liament rose the cry of the London journeymen bakers against their over-work, &c. Berlin, 1842, p. . But in the latter case, the labourer is to that extent really a capitalist in the concern, by supplying a portion of the funds necessary for car- rying it on." Mill might have gone further and have added, that the labourer who advances to himself not only the necessaries of life but also the means of production, is in reality nothing but his own wage-labourer. Not content with this treachery, the "great Liberal party" allowed the English judges, ever complais- ant in the service of the ruling classes, to dig up again the earlier laws against "conspiracy," and to apply them to coalitions of labour- ers. . How it itself originates, we need not here inquire as yet. At least, some such assumption was necessary since only commodity-owners with equal rights confronted each other, and the sole means by which 584 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION a man could become possessed of the commodities of others, was by alienating his own commodities; and these could be replaced by labour alone. . The functions of hoards, therefore, arise in part out of the function of money, as the medium of the home circulation and home payments, and in part out of its function of money of the world. 1 10 " North Street, No. 18 . Both part with goods that, as use-values, are of no service to them, and receive others that they can make use of. It appears as primitive, because THE SO-CALLED PRIMITIVE ACCUMULATION 715 it forms the pre-historic stage of capital and of the mode of pro- duction corresponding with it. . But that which at first was but a starting-point, becomes, by the mere continuity of the process, by simple reproduction, the pe- culiar result, constantly renewed and perpetuated, of capitalist production. 21, 22. To exchange a pound of bread against a pound of bread ... Econ." London, 1832, pp. 2 1 "'EXiuCouot)? A pamphlet published by Hardwicke about 2 years ago states that the abuses complained of in 1842, are in full bloom at the present day. The jurist's consciousness recognises in this, at most, a material difference, ex- pressed in the juridically equivalent formulae: "Do ut des, do ut facias, facio ut des, facio ut facias." Further. Rent, £3 a year. "Die Philosophie des Aristoteles," Vol. 899.) 3 "Exchange confers no value at all upon products." (F. . By our explanation of the different parts played by the vari- ous factors of the labour-process in the formation of the prod- uct's value, we have, in fact, disclosed the characters of the different functions allotted to the different elements of capital hand, re-appears in the value of that vigour, is not the means of subsistence, but their value. If the capital further grows to £2,000, 400 men will be em- ployed, or one-third more than under the old system. In Western Europe, the home of Political Economy, the process of primitive accumulation is more or less accomplished. The common and very imperfect bellows of the blacksmith is, in England, occasionally converted into a blowing-engine, by cdnne ting its arm with a steam- engine. they would report to the chief inspector, who would then bring his scientific knowledge to bear on the facts they have stated?" (ns. 1 Therefore,* however much the capitalist mode of appropria- tion may seem to fly in the face of the original laws of commodity production, it nevertheless arises, not from a violation, but, on the contrary, from the application of these laws. By an unlimited extension of the working-day, you may in one day use up a quantity of labour- power greater than I can restore in three. The various manufactures so combined form more or less separate departments of a larger manufacture, but are at the same time independent processes, each with its own divi- sion of labour. In fact one class of manufacturers, the spinners of woollen yarn, now rarely employ children under thirteen years of age, i.e., half-timers. 15.) 1 It lies, of course, entirely beyond my purpose to take into considera- tion such details as the seigniorage on minting. The value which the labour-power produces is, on the other hand, 6s., because it, in fact, functions during 12 hours, and the value it pro- duces depends, not on its own value, but on the length of time it is in action. On that groundwork each separate branch of production acquires empirically the form that is technically suited to it, slowly perfects it, and, so soon as a given degree of maturity has been reached, rapidly crystallises that form. 3 The labourer is the owner of his labour-power until he has done bargaining for its sale with the capitalist; and he can sell no more than what he has — i.e., his individual, isolated labour-power. The same use-value is both the product of a previous process, and a means of pro- duction in a later process. 2 "There is a certain density of population which is convenient, both tor social intercourse, and for that combination ot powers by which the prod- uce of labour is increased." (James Mill, I. 1 [Note in the 4th German edition: I am inserting the parenthesis because its omission has often given rise to the misunderstanding that every product that is consumed by some one other than its producer is considered in Marx a commodity. Peel (father of the "minis- ter of plausibility"), brought in his bill for the protection of children, in 1815, Francis Horner, lumen of the Bullion Committee and intimate friend of Ricardo, said in the House of Commons: "It is notorious, that with a bank- rupt's effects, a gang, if he might use the word, of these children had been put up to sale, and were advertised publicly as part of the property. "Previous to the famine, the labourer enjoyed his cabin .... The smaller the part of it which is required for the production of the necessary means of subsistence, so much the greater is the part that can be set to do other work. Therefore, by thus equating the two substances, expression would be given to their chemical composition, while their different physical forms would be neglected. 39.) [The English language has the advantage of possessing different words for the two aspects of labour here considered. xxxv., n. Any alteration in this form, except in trivial matters, is 1 G. 106 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION another, the circulation of materialised social labour. of 1 2 cotton, worth 13^- shillings; but the 6-~- shillings additional value contained in it, are the equivalent for the cotton consumed in 2 spinning the remaining 6-5- lbs. It fixed 8 hours a day for children between 8 and 12, 12 hours for children between 12 and 16, &c, with many exceptions which allow night-work even for children 8 years old. But the peo- ple, from whom he buys the yarn and the machinery, pay for la- bour with a part of the purchase money, and so on until the whole £2,000 are spent in the payment of wages, i.e. , until the entire prod- uct represented by the £2,000 has been consumed by productive labourers. Thus the prescribed corvee amounts to 56 working-days yearly. iron. 143 and Note.) Apart from Liebig's wrong interpretation of the word "labour," by which word he understands something quite different from what Political MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 507 ist production, therefore, develops technology, and the combin- ing together of various processes into a social whole, only by sapping the original sources of all wealth— the soil and the la- bourer. In 1854 the length of the railroads worked in the United King- dom was 8,054 miles, with a paid-up capital of £286,068,794; in 1864 the length was 12,789 miles, with capital paid up of £425,719,613. I., pp. This is unskilful work, because, indeed, the owner of capital, after all, does some- thing more than the merely creating and preserving of the same: namely, the abstention from the enjoyment of it, for which he demands, e.g., inter- est." (1. I have done so seven or eight weeks." Fifteen hours of labour for a child 7 years old! J. By the 'machinery' Mr. Potter means the human machinery, for he goes on to protest that he does not mean to use them as an absolute property. This formula is only a popular expression for n^^^m The capitalist pays the value, so far as price coincides with value, of the labour-power, and receives in exchange the disposal of the living labour-power itself. But in those cases in which the formal alienation by sale of the use-value of a commodity, is not simultaneous with its actual delivery to the buyer, the money of the latter usually functions as means of payment. 1 The different quantities of commodities of the same kind, produced in differ- ent countries in the same working-time, have, therefore, unequal international values, which are expressed in different prices, i.e., in sums of money varying according to international values. This value is determined by the labour-time required for its production, and is expressed by the quantity of any other commodity that costs the same amount of labour- time. 23. Thus "tout est pour le mieux dans le meilleur des mondes possi- bles." By turning his money into commodities that serve as the material elements of a new product, and as factors in the labour- process, by incorporating living labour with their dead sub- stance, the capitalist at the same time converts value, i.e., past r materialised, and dead labour into capital, into value big with value, a live monster that is fruitful and multiplies. "True wealth (6 dXri&tvoi; nkou'ot;) consists of such values in use; for the quantity of possessions of this kind, capable of making life pleas- ant, is not unlimited. In the construction of the cottages, only one point of view is of moment, 1 1. (c) to the amount of £400; and of wages (v) to the amount of £100; and further, that the surplus-value (s) =£100. The commodity, from being the individual product of an independent artificer, becomes the so- cial product of a union of artificers, each of whom performs one, 1 To give a more modern instance: The silk spinning and weaving of Lyons and Nimes "est toute patriarcale; elle emploie beaucoup de femmes et d'enfants, mais sans les epuiser ni les corrompre; elle les laisse dans leur belles vallees de la Drome, du Var, de I'lsere, de Vaucluse, pour y elever des vers et devider leurscocons; jamais elle n'entre dans une veritable fabri- que Pour el re aussi bien observe ... 192.) 176 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION the sphere of circulation. c, pp 41-42. 1 In general, the time of working the mill is extended to 13 y hours, from 6 a. * Here (from "The Tory Cabinet. A, who sells wine and buys corn, possibly produces more wine, with given labour-time, than farmer B could, and B, on the other hand, more corn than wine-grower A could. If the time socially necessary for the pro- duction of any commodity alters— and a given weight of cotton represents, after a bad harvest, more labour than after a good one — all previously existing commodities of the same class are affected, because they are, as it were, only individuals of the species, * and their value at any given time is measured by the labour socially necessary, i.e., by the labour necessary for their production under the then existing social conditions. .... Marx, 1. c., p. The same applies to the labour embodied in the spindle, without whose wear and tear the cotton could not be spun. . Yet they are produced without capital, machinery, division of la- bour, or any of those means which give such facilities to the manu- facturing interest of Europe. His system- atic colonisation is a mere pis aller, since he unfortunately has to do with free men, not with slaves. 6). c, p. By how much? The land, formerly overspread with small tenants or labourers, was peopled in proportion to its produce, but under the new system of improved cultivation and increased rents, the largest possible produce is obtained at the least possible expense: and the use- less hands being, with this view, removed, the population is reduced, not to what the land will maintain, but to what it will employ. 113.) 2 "The employments, placed under restriction, were connected with the manufacture of textile fabrics by the aid of steam or water-power. Hence, the labourer preserves the values of the consumed means of production, or transfers them as portions of its value to the product, not by virtue of his additional labour, abstractedly considered, but by virtue of the particular useful character of that labour, by virtue of its special productive form. * But while upsetting 1 "You divide the people into two hostile camps of clownish boors and emasculated dwarfs. "The fact is, that prior to the Act of 1833, young persons and children were worked all night, all day, or both ad libitum." 1 A normal working-day for modern industry only dates from the Factory Act of 1833, which included cotton, wool, flax, and silk factories. .542 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION above the average, and the disadvantage of a labour-power below the average, affects the slave-owner; in the wage-labour system it affects the labourer himself, because his labour-power is, in the one case, sold by himself, in the other, by a third person. They are dying of hunger. On the other hand, the quantitative proportion in which the articles are exchangeable, becomes dependent on their produc- tion itself. From that moment it always represents the realised price of some commodity. Even the most superficial comparison requires the reduction first of the average day-wage for the same trades, in different countries, to a uniform working-day. Is 6-J-d. adds value to products, for the same products in the hands of consumers, are worth more than in the hands of producers, and it may strictly be considered an act of produc- tion." 1 But commodities are not paid for twice over, once on account of their use-value, and again on account of their value. von Dr. Rud. into the original capital and the profit, the increment to the capital ... The celebrated sophist and sycophant, Edmund Burke, goes so far as to make the following assertion, based on his practical observations as a farmer; viz., that "in so small a platoon" as that of five farm labourers, all individual differences in the la- bour vanish, and that consequently any given five adult farm la- bourers taken together, will in the same time do as much work as any other five. THE GENERAL LAW OP CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 651 1846 £58,842,377 1849 63,596,052 1856 115,826,948 1860 135,842,817 1865 165,862,402 1866 188,917, 563* After these few examples one understands the cry of triumph of the Registrar-General of the British people: "Rapidly as the population has increased, it has not kept pace with the progress of industry and wealth." 2 Let us turn now to the direct agents of this industry, or the pro- ducers of this wealth, to the working-class. Lastly, steam-power, in those agricultural operations in which it can be employed improves, in comparison with horse-power, the quality of the work. But money itself has no price. The condition of the adult male operatives, even during the years of prosperity, may be judged from the note sub- joined. The cheapest house in Dun- ton, 15 feet long externally, 10 broad, let for £3. . It tries to rescue the law from collision with contradictory phenomena by a violent abstraction. 1 To what extent the capitalist reckons the existence of such a skilled class among the factors of production that belong to him by right, and to what extent he actually regards it as the real- ity of his variable capital, is seen so soon as a crisis threatens him with its loss. Lecture III., p. J. 48,980 2,348 Ireland . Hist. 11 and 14.) 10 10 10 Mr. Broadhurst might just as well say: consider the tractions-^, -^, j-^r, &c, the number 10 remains unchanged, and yet its proportional magnitude, its magnitude relatively to the numbers 20. The duration of the surplus-labour, however, is ar- rived at, by subtracting the necessary labour-time from the total working-day. 2 For further details on this subject see in my work cited above, the chapter on "The precious metals." 3 "II danaro e la merce universale" (Verri, 1. The accidental relation between two individual commodity- owners disappears. One of its parts, certainly, is determined by the work- ing-time required for the reproduction of the labour-power of the labourer himself. 107-110). All persons have the right to take away the children of the vaga- bonds and to keep them as apprentices, the young men until the 24th year, the girls until the 20th. If he advances it for the purposes of production, the ad- vances made come from his own funds, exactly as on the day when he first entered the market. "Much as we deplore the evils before men- tioned, it would not be possible to prevent them by any scheme of agreement between the manufacturers.... The nations bragged cynically of every infamy that served them as a means to capital- istic accumulation. From his point of view, the labour- process is nothing more than the consumption of the commodity purchased, i.e., of labour-power; but this consumption cannot be effected except by supplying the labour-power with the means of production. The same result may be arrived at in the following way. c, c. In England this legislation began under Henry VII. . It is accordingly in the most populous countries, where there are most idle men, that it is most abundant. . of cotton absorb, during their conversion into yarn, only 150 hours' labour, or fifteen days' labour of ten hours each. ne change rien non plus a la somme des valeurs sociales, bien qu'il ajoute a la fortune de Tun ce qu'il ote de la fortune de 1'autre." (J. (It will be seen from the preceding passage that the movement of the English agricultural proletariat, entirely crushed since the suppression of its violent manifestations after 1830. 3 Gladstone, House of Commons, 7th April, 1864. 178. 2 He threatens all sorts of things. The realisation of a commodity's price, or of its ideal value-form, is therefore at the same time the realisation of the ideal use-value of money; the conversion of a commodity into money, is the simul- taneous conversion of money into a commodity. 2 "They especially objected to work beyond the 12 hours per day, because the law which fixed those hours, is the only good which remains to 'them of the legislation of the Republic." ("Rep. The increase of profits liable to income tax (farmers and some other categories not included) in Great Britain from 1853 to 1864 amounted to 50.47% or 4.58% as the annual average, 1 that of the population during the same period to about 12%. It manifests itself, amongst other ways, in the fright- ful fact that a great part of the children employed in modern fac- tories and manufactures, are from their earliest years riveted to the most simple manipulations, and exploited for years, without being taught a single sort of work that would afterwards make them of use, even in the same manufactory or factory. The surplus-value on the contrary is, originally, the value of a definite portion of the gross product. If the labour- fund constantly flows to him in the form of money that pays for his labour, it is because the product he has created moves constant- ly away from him in the form of capital. c, bk. 29, 1, THE GENERAL LAW OP CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 707 have they begun to form a fraction of the class of purely wage- labourers, a special class, connected with its wage-masters only by monetary relations. On the other hand, a single needle-machine makes 145,000 in a working-day of 11 hours. The ground-rents are high, as they are general- ly where population is dense. More men are out of work now where chil- dren and women are employed than formerly." (1. Proudhon, 1847, p. 8 1. ... 4 The cleanly weeded land, and the uncleanly human weeds, of Lincolnshire, are pole and counterpole of capitalistic production. c, pp. In his "Rechtsphilosophie" he says: "By well educated men we understand in the first instance, those who can do everything that others do." 364 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION solely owing to a revolution in the instruments of labour. They are the light infantry of capital, thrown by it, according to its needs, now to this point, now to that. . On the other hand, in the circulation M— C— M, both the money and the commodity rep- resent only different modes of existence of value itself, the money its general mode, and the commodity its particular, or, so to say, disguised mode. The purchase of labour-power for a fixed period is the prelude to the process of production; and this prelude is constantly repeat- ed when the stipulated term comes to an end, when a definite pe- riod of production, such as a week or a month, has elapsed. On leaving this sphere of simple circulation or of exchange of commodities, which furnishes the "Free-trader Vulgaris" with his views and ideas, and with the standard by which he judges a society based on capital and wages, we think we can perceive a change in the physiognomy of our dramatis persona?. . xv., n. On the other hand, the gold, in its metallic reality, ranks as the embodiment of value, as money. c, p. On promoting that power their attention is fixed and almost exclusively fixed." (R. 1 The following shows the debtor and creditor relations existing be- tween English traders at the beginning of the 18th century. The im- provements in the transmitting mechanism have lessened friction, and, what so strikingly distinguishes modern from the older ma- chinery, have reduced the diameter and weight of the shafting to a constantly decreasing minimum. . On the other hand, the simple funda- mental form of the process of accumulation is obscured by the in- cident of the circulation which brings it about, and by the split- ting up of surplus-value. Great competition was shown between the different firms 454 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION A necessary condition, therefore, to the growth of the number of factory hands, is a proportionally much more rapid growth of the amount of capital invested in mills. In Fingringhoe, a parish of 3,443 acres, were in 1851, 145 houses; in 1861, only 110. In this case the mere maintenance of life would be the end of his production, not the increase of wealth; but this latter is implied in capitalist production. With few exceptions, e.g., when public gas-works are involved, the worker in England is now put on an equal footing with the employer in case of breach of contract and can be sued only civilly.— F.E.] The second case occurs in Wiltshire at the end of November 1863. Slow as was the advance of accumulation compared with that of more modern times, it found a check in the natural limits of the exploitable labouring population, limits which could only be got rid of by forcible means to be mentioned later. 1 8 adults Jowett Street, No. 56 . We have therefore to examine first the distinguishing characteris- tics of the forms of the circuits M— C— M and C— M— C, and in doing this the real difference that underlies the mere difference of form will reveal itself. . And lastly, if, as must be the case, the relative value of each commodity in turn, becomes expressed in this expanded form, we get for each of them a relative value- form, different in every case, and consisting of an interminable series of expressions of value. even in some instances . It ended with the complete ruin of the 300 cot- tage factories. It is itself an eco- nomic power. xxix., xxx. Leyde, 1766," t. In the face of the habitual mode of life of the old feudal nobility, which, as Hegel rightly says, "consists in consuming what is in hand," and more especially displays itself in the luxury of personal retain- ers, it was extremely important for bourgeois economy to promul- gate the doctrine that accumulation of capital is the first duty of every citizen, and to preach without ceasing, that a man cannot accumulate, if he eats up all his revenue, instead of spending a good part of it in the acquisition of additional productive labourers, who bring in more than they cost. d'Et Dumont, 3eme edit. It is, however, just this ultimate money-form of the world of commodities that actually conceals, instead of disclosing, the social character of private labour, and the social relations between the individual producers. One form would appear peculiar to them, and is known as potter's asthma, or potter's consumption. That rent-rolls and profits can ever be "excessive," or that their plethora is in any way connected with plethora of the people's misery is, of course, an idea as "disrepu- table" as "unsound." He keeps to facts. In so far as the "Contrariwise, in the process M — G, the money can be alienated as a real means of purchase, and in that way, the price of the commodity can be realised before the use-value of the money is realised and the commodity actually delivered. With a given value of labour-power, therefore, the mag- nitude of the variable capital varies directly as the number of labourers employed simultaneously. A sugar-loaf being a body, is heavy, and therefore has weight: but we can neither see nor touch this weight. and E., in which no special details are given, include the incomes of employ- es, officers, State sinecurists> State fundholders, &c. 8 Reports, &c, for 30th April, 1849, p. 124, p. 1 "Political economists are too apt to consider a certain quantity of capital and a certain number of labourers as productive instruments of uni- form power, or operating with a certain uniform intensity... This judgment was given not by the "Great Unpaid," the provincial Dogberries, but by one of the highestcourts of justice in London. by far the best grazing ground in the wide district of Badenoch; a part of the Black Mount forest was the best pasture for black-faced sheep in Scotland. Since then they have grown yet worse. THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 669 men worked; but on the day of my visit the pens were so snowed up that nobody could sit in them. * These separate values are now all concentrated in one thing; but so they were also in the sum of fifteen shillings, before it was split up into three parts, by the purchase of the commodities. Ill, pp. But this capitalist soul of theirs is so intimately wedded, in the head of the political economist, to their material substance, that he christens them capital under all circumstances, even when they are its exact opposite. Now, however, property turns out to be the right, on the part of the capitalist, to appropriate the unpaid labour of others or its product, and to be the impossibility, on the part of the labourer, of appropriating his own product. The value of the product of the working-day of 12 hours is twenty shillings. S. Where in our country agriculture on a large scale exists, hence particularly in the East, it has become possible only in consequence of the clearing of the estates ("Bauernlegen"), a practice which became widespread in the 16th century and was particularly so since 1648.— F. Des macons par exemple, occupes a faire passer de mains en mains des bn- ques a un echafaudage superieur, font tous la meme besogne, et pourtant ll existe parmi eux une espece de division de travail, qui consiste en ce que chacun d'eux fait passer la brique par unespace donne et que tous ensemble la font parvenir beaucoup plus promptement a l'endroit marque qu lis ne le feraient si chacun d'eux portait sa brique separement jusqu a 1 echaiauaage superieur." (F. . But thereby a definite quantity of human muscle, nerve, brain, &c, is wasted, and these require to be restored. And this holds generally with the exception of certain tracts of Ulster; in the south, in the counties of Cork, Limerick, Kilkenny, &c; in the east, in Wicklow, Wexford, &c; in the centre of Ireland, in King's and Queen's County, Dublin, &c; in the west, in Sligo, Roscommon, Mayo, Galway, &c. The bourgeoisie, at its rise, wants and uses the power of the state to "regulate" wages, i.e., to force them within the limits suitable for surplus- value making, to lengthen the working-day and to keep the la- bourer himself in the normal degree of dependence. ix., n. But the division of la- bour in manufacture makes this increase in the number of workmen a technical necessity. Eden is as to the hor- rors of the expropriation of the agricultural population from the soil, from the last third of the 15th century to his own time; with all the self-satisfaction with which he rejoices in this process, "essential" for establishing capitalistic agriculture and "the due proportion between arable and pasture land'* — he does not show, however, the same economic insight in respect to the necessity of child-stealing and child-slavery for the transformation of manu- facturing exploitation into factory exploitation, and the establish- ment of the "true relation" between capital and labour-power. The less he is attracted by the nature of the work, and the mode in which it is carried on, and the less, therefore, he enjoys it as something which gives play to his bodily and men- tal powers, the more close his attention is forced to be. It is a thick folio volume in which the Report itself occupies only five lines to this effect; that the committee has nothing to say, and that more witnesses must be examined! The mode of examining the witnesses reminds one of the cross-examination of witnesses in English courts of justice, where the advocate tries, by means of impudent, unexpected, equivocal and involved questions, put without connexion, to intimidate, surprise, and confound the witness, and to give a forced meaning to the answers extorted from him. Does a man wish to better himself, to go as a plate-layer on the railway, or to begin quar- ry-work, the same power is ready with 'Work for me at this low rate of wages, or begone at a week's notice; take your pig with you, and get what you can for the potatoes growing in your garden.' Should his interest appear to be better served by it, an enhanced rent is sometimes preferred in these cases by the owner (i.e., the farmer) as the penalty for leaving his service." (Dr. Hun- ter, 1. It is these absolute movements of the accumulation of capital which are reflected as relative move- ments of the mass of exploitable labour-power, and therefore seem produced by the latter' s own independent movement. d s. Of 1 1 this value each article now has embodied in it^th, instead of^th, threepence instead of sixpence; or, what amounts to the same thing, only half an hour's instead of a whole hour's labour-time, is now added to the means of production while they are being transformed into each article. c, p. The class which one year passes with full weight, loses enough by wear and tear to draw the scales next year against it." (House of Lords' Committee, 1848, n. 3 The 10 Hours' Act has, in the branches of industry that come under it, "put an end to the premature decrepitude of the former long-hour workers." (Reports, &c, for 31st Oct., 1859, p. How great then is the confusion of ideas exhibited in the following ex- tract! "Mr. Ricardo says a portion of the labour of the engineer in making {stocking] machines" is contained for example in the value of a pair of stock- ings. 2 Neither are we here concerned to know how the object satisfies these wants, whether directly as means of subsistence, or indirectly as means of production. 1 And lastly, from the moment that men in any way work for one another, their labour assumes a social form. The higher wages stimulate the working population to more rapid multiplication, and this goes on until the labour-market becomes too full, and therefore capital, relatively to the supply of labour, becomes insufficient. And this simply requires to be calculated. London, 1864, pp. It is therefore self-evident, to what an enormous extent the toil of the factory operative has increased during the last 10 years." 1 Although, therefore, the Factory Inspectors unceasingly and with justice, commend the results of the Acts of 1844 and 1850, yet they admit that the shortening of the hours of labour has already called forth such an intensification of the labour as is in- jurious to the health of the workman and to his capacity for work. In France, where the expropriation was effected in another way, the ordonnance of Moulins, 1571, and the Edict of 1656, correspond to the English poor-laws. "From a gen- eral compilation of wages allowed to the labourers in different trades, it follows that the highest average of daily wage is 1 franc 56c, for men, 89 centimes for women, 56 centimes for boys, and 55 centimes for girls. The only part of the so-called national wealth that actually enters into the collec- tive possessions of modern peoples is — their national debt. . The 10,000 spindles, including preparation-machinery, and motive power, cost, we will assume, £1 per spindle, amounting to a total of £10,000. But if there is as much silver as will transact the small payments independent of gold, the retail trader must then receive silver for small purchases; and it must of neces- sity accumulate in his hands." (David Buchanan "Inquiry into the Taxation and Commercial Policy of Great Britain." Edinburgh, 1844, pp. 2 Interesting details on this fish trade will be found in Mr. David Urqu- hart's Portfolio, new series.— Nassau W. That part of capital then, which is represented by the means of production, by the raw material, aux- iliary material and the instruments of labour, does not, in the process of production, undergo any quantitative alteration of value. 1 In this way, during the manufacturing period, were developed the first scientific and technical elements of Modern Mechanical Industry. A mule is a machine for spinning cotton. of Insp. The lower the wages, the higher is the proportion in which ever so insignificant a rise of them expresses itself. Empl. Smith, "is larger than the average quantity indicates, since he eats a larger share .... In the one case both the starting-point and the goal are commodi- ties, in the other they are money. The chief industries of this kind are, at present, gas-works, telegraphs, photography, steam nav- igation, and railways. It is only after considerable development of the science of mechanics, and accumulated practical experience, that the form of a machine becomes settled entirely in accordance with mechanical principles, and emancipated from the traditional form of the tool that gave rise to it. 4 The following few figures indicate the increase in the "factories" of the United Kingdom since 1848: 418 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION SECTION IV.— THE FACTORY At the commencement of this chapter we considered that which we may call the body of the factory, i.e., machinery or- ganised into a system. It usurps the time for growth, development, and healthy maintenance of the body. The tithe to be rendered to the priest is more matter of fact than his blessing. First, the price of the commodities varies inversely as the value of the money, and then the quantity of the medium of circulation varies directly as the price of the commodities, Exactly the same thing would happen 118 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION if, for instance, instead of the value of gold falling, gold were re- placed by silver as the measure of value, or if, instead of the value of silver rising, gold were to thrust silver out from being the measure of value. The same material has now more value, because it contains a greater quantity of labour. These idyllic proceedings are the chief momenta of primitive accumulation. It manifests itself as this two-fold thing, that it is, as soon as its value assumes an independent form — viz., the form of exchange-value. In its higher degrees it [i.e., over-crowding] almost necessarily involves such negation of all delicacy, such unclean confusion of bodies and bodily functions, such exposure of animal and sexual nakedness, as is rather bes- tial than human. a great number of the women have illegitimate children, and that at such an immature age that even those most conversant with criminal statistics are astounded." 1 And the native land of these model families is the pattern Christian country for Europe; so says at least Count Montalembert, cer- tainly a competent authority on Christianity! Wages in the above industries, miserable as they are (the maximum wages of a child in the straw-plait schools rising in rare cases to 3 shillings), are reduced far below their nominal amount by the prevalence of the truck system everywhere, but especially in the lace districts. Polit." Paris, 1847, pp. We put the constant part of the value of the product =0, as it plays no part in the creation of value. 139, § 23, 1st July, 1857.) 272 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION The first "Statute of Labourers" (23 Edward III., 1349) found its immediate pretext (not its cause, for legislation of this kind lasts centuries after the pretext for it has disappeared) in the great plague that decimated the people, so that, as a Tory writer says, "The difficulty of getting men to work on reason- able terms (i.e., at a price that left their employers a reasonable quantity of surplus-labour) grew to such a height as to be quite intolerable." 1 Reasonable wages were, therefore, fixed by law as well as the limits of the working-day. We do not pause longer on the beauty of this system, as we shall have to return to it later. 226 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION \ if you work your mills for 10 hours instead of ll-y, then, other things being equal, the daily consumption of cotton, machinery, &c, will decrease in proportion. For instance, J B Say sets himself up as a judge of crises, because, forsooth, he knows that a commodity is a product. They were picking oakum and disputing the while as to which could work the longest on a given quantity of food — for endurance was the point of honour. The might of the feudal lord, like that of the sovereign, depended not on the length of his rent-roll, but on the number of his sub- jects, and the latter depended on the number of peasant pro- prietors. As soon as a machine executes, without man's help, all the movements requisite to elab- orate the raw material, needing only attendance frcm him, we have an automatic system of machinery, and one that is suscep- tible of constant improvement in its details. 45.) "Free labour (if so it may be termed) even in a free country, requires the strong arm of the law to protect it." (Reports, &c, for October 31st, 1864, p. The independent existence of the exchange-value of a com- modity is here a transient apparition, by means of which the com- modity is immediately replaced by another commodity. A third owner of commodi- 1 S. In other words, the labour of the individual asserts itself as a part of the labour of society, only by means of the relations which the act of exchange establishes directly between the products, and indirect- ly, through them, between the producers. is here merely a symbol to show that this value un- dergoes a process. He existed only on sufferance, as a dealer in the products of the handicrafts. Thus Mr. Longe, one of the commissioners, found in Coventry and the neighbourhood boys of from 10 to 15 years em- ployed in driving the ribbon-looms, not to mention younger children who had to drive smaller machines. If demand and supply balance, the oscillation of prices ceases, all other conditions remaining the same. the supplies of wages and shelter are not cal- culated on the profit to be derived from him. The value of the linen is represented as relative value, or appears in relative form. For instance, taking our former example, c=£410: suppose this sum to consist of £312 value of raw mate- rial, £44 value of auxiliary material, and £54 value of the machin- ery worn away in the process; and suppose that the total value of the machinery employed is £1,054. Nevertheless there are two circumstances whose influence is decisive. This unit, by subsequent division into aliquot parts, becomes itself the standard or scale. Moreover, although our weaver's labour may be a recognised branch of the social division of labour, yet that fact is by no means sufficient to guarantee the utility of his 20 yards of linen. There are, besides, two other factors that enter into the determination of the value of labour-power. In order to make gold a standard of price, a certain weight must be fixed upon as the unit. These aliquot parts, which thenceforth serve as units of money, are then subdivided into other aliquot parts with legal names, such as shilling, penny, &c. 31st October, 1862," p. The value of labour-power is determined by the value of a given quantity of necessaries. The natural tendency of circulation to convert coins into a mere semblance of what they profess to be, into a symbol of the weight of metal they are offi- cially supposed to contain, is recognised by modern legislation, which fixes the loss of weight sufficient to demonetise a gold coin, or to make it no longer legal tender. And gradual- ly, for many years past, the state of the labourer in these re- spects has been deteriorating, house-room being now greatly more difficult for him to find, and, when found, greatly less suitable to his needs than, perhaps, for centuries had been the case. Finally, in the last hour and 12 minutes he produces another 2 lbs. Genovesi, Lezioni di Economia Civile (1765), Custodi's edit, of Italian Economists. 103.) Redgrave, the Factory Inspector mentioned above, after the Industrial Exhibition in 1851, travelled on the Continent, especially in France and Germany, for the purpose of inquiring into the conditions of the factories. The ratio between the wages paid by the farmer, and the wage-deficit made good by the parish, shows us two things. Population grew. To the owner of a commodity, every other commodity is, in regard to his own, a particular equivalent, and consequently his own commodity is the universal equivalent for all the others. a week (this belongs to the parents) and '2d. They know well enough that their "close villages" and "show-villages" are the birth- places of the open villages, and could not exist without them. The more intense working-day of one nation would be represented by a greater sum of money than would the less intense day of another nation. Now it is evident that the circuit M — C — M would be absurd and without meaning if the intention were to exchange by this means two equal sums of money, £100 for £100. Then the value of these 24 pieces, after subtraction of the portion of constant capital contained in them, is 6 shillings, and the value of a single piece 3d. 758 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION "In the counties of Derbyshire, Nottinghamshire, and more particularly in Lancashire," says Fielden, "the newly- invented machinery was used in large factories built on the sides of streams capable of turning the water-wheel. The dyes, too, were chiefly extracted by the women from trees, shrubs and herbs." (Dugald Stewart's "Works," Ham- ilton's Ed., Vol. a day. The collier is also often supplied with water by the proprietor, which, whether it be good or bad, he has to pay for, or rather he suffers a deduction for from his wages." 2 In conflict with "public opinion," or even with the Officers of Health, capital makes no difficulty about "justifying" the con- ditions partly dangerous, partly degrading, to which it confines the working and domestic life of the labourer, on the ground that they are necessary for profit. One capitalist always kills many. of iron, there exists in equal quantities something common to both. The destructive influence that it exercises on the condition of the wage- labourer concerns us less however, here, than the forcible expro- priation, resulting from it, of peasants, artisans, and in a word, all elements of the lower middle-class. If c=0, or in other words, if there were branches of industry in which the capitalist could dispense with all means of production made by previous labour, whether they be raw material, auxiliary material, or instruments of labour, employing only labour-power and. But their form, too, once definitely settled by experience, petrifies, as is proved by their being in many cases handed down in the same form by one generation to another during thousands of years. The production of a relative surplus-population, or the set- ting free of labourers, goes on therefore yet more rapidly than 1 Harriet Martineau, "A Manchester Strike," 1832, p. 55.) CONTRADICTIONS IN THE FORMULA OF CAPITAL 163 and obtains from him in exchange corn to the value of £50. They entered as separate commodities into the umbrella manufactory, where they were fitted together. In this case he produces no surplus-value for the buyer of his labour, the 6s. The life- time of an instrument of labour, therefore, is spent in the repeti- tion of a greater or less number of similar operations. We conse- quently find that economists, who are thoroughly agreed as to labour-time being the measure of the magnitude of value, have the most strange and contradictory ideas of money, the perfected form of the general equivalent. Many of these cottages are models of untidi- ness, dirt, and dust. A Tory says naively: "Formerly the poor demanded such high wages as to threaten industry and wealth. edit. * more free from stones though it be than ours. for 2 minutes; Is. for 3 minutes, and Is. 6d. Commodities are things, and therefore without power of resistance against man. a ton, amounts to about £4y a week: gas, £1 a week, oil, &c, £4^- a week. 52.) "To all intents and purposes, therefore, as an Act for any benevolent or educational purpose, it is a failure; since it can scarcely be called benevolent to permit, which is tantamount to compelling, women and children to work 14 hours a day with or without meals, as the case may be, and perhaps for longer hours than these, without limit as to age, without reference to sex, and without regard to the social habits of the families of the neighbourhood, in which such works (bleaching and dyeing) are situated." (Reports, &c, for 30th April, 1863, p. You are altogether on the wrong track, if you think that he loses a single moment of his working- day, in reproducing or replacing the values of the cotton, the machinery, and so on. Apart from the increased yield of relative surplus-value through the heightened productive- ness of labour, the same mass of value is now produced for the cap- 1 2 italist say by 3-~- hours of surplus-labour, and 6— hours of neces- o o sary labour, as was previously produced by four hours of surplus- labour and eight hours of necessary labour. . Lord Dufferin is one of those land magnates. Carey tries to prove that the wages of the different nations are directly proportional to the degree of productiveness of the national working-days, in order to draw from this international relation, the conclusion that wages everywhere rise and fall in pro- portion to the productiveness of labour. "Reports on Bank Acts," 1857, 2084.) According to a Parliamentary document of 1864, on the gold and silver import and export of India, the import of gold and silver in 1863 exceeded the export by £ 19,367,764. In the text, however, there is no question of the peculium of the emigrants, who are in great part not labourers. There were eight or nine other boys working last night. that form the substance of the yarn. But the "ruthless" Factory Inspector Leonard Horner was again to the fore. c, p. "I work till 9 o'clock at night six days in the week. THE WORKING-DAY 253 So far, we have dealt with Ireland. It is thus strikingly clear, that means of production never transfer more value to the product than they themselves lose during the labour-process by the destruction of their own use- value. Entirely new branches of production, creating new fields of labour, are also formed, as the direct result either of ma- chinery or of the general industrial changes brought about by it. ...The master cannot willingly see his labour supply being re- moved; he may think, and perhaps justly, that it is both wrong and unsound.... And yet then also they be caste in prison as vagaboundes, because they go aboute and vvorke not: whom no man wyl set a worke though thei neuer so willyngly profre themselues therto." Of these poor fugitives of whom Thomas More says that they were forced to thieve, "7,200 great and petty thieves were put to death," in the reign of Henry VIII. 81-82.) 2 "Wages as well as profits are to be considered, each of them, as really a portion of the finished product." (Ramsay, 1. Children beginning work before 12 noon may not be again em- ployed after 1 p. 1767, t. co C H O EH < P ft O ft bo . (1), finishing; (2), mending. Qrs. In the Speech from the Throne, on 5th February, 1867, the Tory Cabinet of the day announced the in- troduction of Bills, founded on the final recommendations of the Commission, which had completed its labours in 1866. During this transition period, when the use of machinery is a sort of monopoly, the profits are therefore exceptional, and the capitalist endeavours to exploit thoroughly "the sunny time of this his first love," by prolonging the working- day as much as possible. Inflammatory sore throat is common, from the same cause. . This was, in December, 1862, 29,211 grains of carbon, and 1,295 grains of nitrogen weekly. 15.) 2 "Reports of Inspectors of Fact.," 30th April, 1860, pp. The economy in their application is entirely owing to their being consumed in common by a large number of workmen. 1 We see, further: The value of 3s. Every change in their ratio disturbs the ratio which exists between the gold-prices and the silver-prices of commodities, and thus proves, by facts, that a double standard of value is inconsistent with the functions of a standard. of yarn. of Fact.," 31st October, 1859, p. Since he comes into the world neither with a looking glass in his hand, nor as a Fichtian philosopher, to whom "I am I" is sufficient, man first sees and recognises himself in other men. 2 "Both in Staffordshire and in South Wales young girls and women are employed on the pit banks and on the coke heaps, not only by day but also by night. Worsted manufacture: 1851, 102,714 persons: 1861, 79,242. ?" "I believe they would." (n. The capital G is made up of two components, one, the sum of money c laid out upon the means of production, and the oth- er, the sum of money v expended upon the labour-power; c rep- resents the portion that has become constant capital, and v the portion that has become variable capital. The number of saving and industrious labourers will increase, because they will see in good conduct, in activity, a means of essentially bettering their condition, and not of obtaining a small rise of wages that can never be of any importance for the future, and whose sole result is to place men in the position to live a little better, but only from day to day... I shall revert to these Acts and to the new Mining Act of 1872 in Volume II. . Just as a number of tools, then, form the organs of a machine, so a number of machines of one kind constitute the organs of the motive mechanism. What really influenced him was the specific use-value which this commodity possesses of being a source not only of value, but of more value than it has itself. 68.) This work appeared afterwards- as "Traite d'Econ. But, while thus in- corporating labour generally, that is value, it is by the particular form alone of the labour, by the spinning, the weaving and the forging respectively, that the means of production, the cotton and spindle, the yarn and loom, and the iron and anvil become constituent elements of the product, of a new use-value. If the means of production, as they increase in extent and effective power, become to a less extent means of employment of labourers, this state of things is again modified by the fact that in proportion as the pro- ductiveness of labour increases, capital increases its supply of labour more quickly than its demand for labourers. nous tendons a separer toute espece de propriety d'avec toute espece de travail." (Sismondi; "Nouveaux Principes d'Econ. Hence, their modes of production, and of living, and their products are different. 189.) In this case it is evident that a diminution in the unpaid labour in no way interferes with the extension of the domain of capital. But this is impossible without an increase in the productiveness of labour. 134) 2 Dugald Stewart calls manufacturing labourers "living automatons ... Leaving day-work alone open to boys would not answer this purpose." And why not? 2 "They (gangs) have greatly increased of late years. It 274 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION Still, during the greater part of the 18th century, up to the epoch of Modern Industry and machinism, capital in England had not succeeded in seizing for itself, by the payment of the weekly value of labour-power, the whole week of the labourer, with the exception, however, of the agricultural labourers. When I state that coats or boots stand in a relation to linen, because it is the universal incarnation of abstract human labour, the absurdity of the statement is self-evident. m. The oppression of the agricultural population under all these petty tyrants will be understood Monteil says that there were once in France 160,000 judges, where to-day, 4,000 tribunals, including justices of the peace, suffice. He can increase the value of his commodity, by adding fresh labour, and therefore more value to the value in hand, by making, for instance, leather into boots. The possibility, therefore, of quantitative incongruity between price and magni- tude of value, or the deviation of the former from the latter, is inherent in the price-form itself. total annual profit. Barbon, 1. The coat officiates as equivalent, or appears in equivalent form. (he means leave off the consumption of "our" labour-power machines), so that we (ite- rum Grispinus) are really working over-time the whole year round For all these, children and adults alike (152 children and young persons and 140 adults), the average work for the last 18 months has been at the very least 7 days, 5 hours, or 78^- hours a week. Moderate though he be, yet some few wants he has to satisfy, and must therefore do a little useful work of various sorts, such as making tools and furniture, taming goats, fishing and hunting. of cotton and the fraction of a spindle on the other. is obliged to buy at the seller's own terms, his modicum of tea, sugar, flour, soap, can- dles, and beer." (1. c, p. Although no official statistics of agriculture existed for England (they did for Ireland), they were voluntarily given in 10 counties. 3 This division of labour is purely technical. 126 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION latter thereby ceases any longer to be a real equivalent of the com- modities whose prices it realises. 933 Total, . So we go on from day to 1. c. The distinction between these tools and the body proper of the machine, exists from their very birth; for they continue for the most part to be produced by hand- icraft, or by manufacture, and are afterwards fitted into the body ised forms of those relations. At eight we go home. The deer-forest of Ben Aulder was. All raw material is the subject of labour, but 1 "The earth's spontaneous productions being in small quantity, and quite independent of man, appear, as it were, to be furnished by Nature, in the same way as a small sum is given to a young man, in order to put him in a way of industry, and of making his fortune." (James Steuart: "Principles of Polit. But we may affirm this much, that just as true paper money takes its rise in the function of money as the circulating medium, so money based upon credit takes root spontaneously in the func- tion of money as the means of payment. Another expla- nation of the difference between tool and machine is that in the case of a tool, man is the motive power, while the motive power of a machine is something different from man, as is, for instance, an animal, water, wind, and so on. As a general result it was found that "in only one of the ex- amined classes of in-door operatives did the average nitrogen- 1 A peculiar light is thrown on the advance made since the time of Adam Smith, by the fact that by him the word "workhouse" is still occasion- ally used as synonymous with "manufactory"; e.g., the opening of his chap- ter on the division of labour; "those employed in every different branch of the work can often be collected into the same workhouse." THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 655 supply just exceed, while in another it nearly reached, the esti- mated standard of bare sufficiency [i.e., sufficient to avert star- vation diseases], and that in two classes there was defect — in one, a very large defect — of both nitrogen and carbon. Is. 3-U. Rep." Lond. Labour adds oil to the lamp of life, when thinking inflames it. 1733.) "Would you prohibit the employment of women in factories also?" "No, I would not." {n. 169.) 164 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION takes place entirely within the sphere of circulation. And, as the substances consumed by the capitalists and their dependants become more plentiful, so too do these orders of society. 4 1. 166.) 2 "The inventor of the spinning machine has ruined India, a fact, how- ever, that touches us but little." A. 1 But in addition to the material wear and tear, a machine also undergoes, what we may call a moral depreciation. The rate of surplus-value and the length of the working-day depended on the magnitude of this pro- longation. What economists there- fore call value of labour, is in fact the value of labour-power, as it exists in the personality of the labourer, which is as different from its function, labour, as a machine is from the work it performs. 1 The dogma was used by Bentham himself, as well as by Malthus, James Mill, MacCulloch, etc., for an apologet- ic purpose, and especially in order to represent one part of capi- tal, namely, variable capital, or that part convertible into la- bour-power, as a fixed magnitude. Not taking into account the great periodically recurring forms that the changing phases THE GENERAL LAW OP CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 641 of the industrial cycle impress on it, now an acute form during the crisis, then again a chronic form during dull times — it has always three forms, the floating, the latent, the stagnant. 36 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION standards of measure for the quantities of these useful objects. How then to find this price, i.e., the money-value of a given quantity of labour? 13.) "Demand [for labour] will rise ... My wife gets up and goes along with me. Here, the rise in the price of labour- power does not necessarily imply that the price has risen above the value of labour-power. The new Factory Act of June 8th, 1847, enacted that on July 1st, 1847, there should be a preliminary shortening of the working-day for "young persons" (from 13 to 18), and all fe- males to 11 hours, but that on May 1st, 1848, there should be a definite limitation of the working-day to 10 hours. Wakefield: "A View of the Art of Colonisation." London, 1849, p. has no occasion to exert his understanding. He informed Mr. White, one of the Inquiry Commis- sioners: "As far as I can see, the greater amount of education which a part of the working-class has enjoyed for some years past is an evil. Price, 1. We are resolved to put forth all our strength until this glorious result is attained." 1 At the same time, the Congress of the International Working Men's Association at Geneva, on the proposition of the London General Council, resolved that "the limitation of the working-day is a preliminary condition without which all further attempts at improvement and emancipation must prove abortive . What were once fens and sandbanks, bear now a luxuriant sea of corn and the highest of rents. 1 Pillow lace-making is chiefly carried on in England in two agricultural districts; one, the Honiton lace district, extending from 20 to 30 miles along the south coast of Devonshire, and including a few places in North Devon; the other comprising a great part of the counties of Buckingham, Bedford, and North- ampton, and also the adjoining portions of Oxfordshire and Hunt- ingdonshire. The seller's commodity circulates, and realises its price, but only in the shape of a legal claim upon money. II., p. c, p. Age 25-35. The composition of capital is to be understood in a two-fold sense. Political Economy, which as an independent science, first sprang into being during the period of manufacture, views the social division of labour only from the standpoint of manufac- ture, 2 and sees in it only the means of producing more commodities 1 The simple belief in the inventive genius exercised a priori by the individual capitalist in division of labour, exists now-a-days only among German professors, of the stamp of Herr Roscher, who, to recompense the cap- italist from whose Jovian head division of labour sprang ready formed, dedicates to him "various wages" (diverse Arbeitslohne). 1 Leonard Horner uses the expression "nefarious practices" in his official reports. It is a matter of course, that all this is applicable to the simple circulation of commodities alone, the only form that we are now considering. "The masters tempt them by extra pay and supper," which they eat in neighbouring public houses. . Nay, this very loom, though a tool when worked by hand, would, if worked by steam, be a machine. 5 John Bellers remarked as far back as 1699: "The uncertainty of fash- ions does increase necessitous poor. "We work on with no stoppage for meals, so that the day's work of IOV2 hours is finished by 4.30 p. It amounts in the 3 different working-days respectively to 16j, 50 and 100 per 232 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION cent. 2 Mr. White, a commissioner, visited a military clothing manufactory that employed 1,000 to 1,200 persons, almost all females, and a shoe manufac- tory with 1,300 persons; of these nearly one half were children and young persons. In order to keep the lace clean, and although the floor is tiled or flagged, the children are often compelled, even in winter, to pull off their shoes. The means of production on the one hand, labour-power on the other, are merely the different modes of existence which the value of the original capital assumed when from being money it was transformed into the various factors of the labour-process. Hence the co-operative character of the labour-process is, in the latter case, a technical necessity dictated by the instrument of labour itself. Products are therefore not only results, but also essential conditions of labour. The productiveness of labour depends not only on the profi- ciency of the workman, but on the perfection of his tools. 8, c.) Further facts on this subject will be given later. Say in the vulgarisation of Adam Smith. Paris, 1846. The increase of some is a consequence, that of the others a condition of the increasing productivity of labour. 415. 12.1 Barley, 172,700 177,102 4,402 Barley . But in this latter case, the value of each single product falls, for it costs less labour than before; in the former case, that value remains unchanged, for each article costs the same labour as before. Since the bodily form of each single commodity is one particular equivalent form amongst numberless others, we have, on the whole, nothing but fragmentary equivalent forms, each excluding the others. If the same working-day now supplies, in consequence of the doubled productiveness of labour, 48 pieces instead of 24, and all other circumstances remain unchanged, 1 3 then the piece-wage falls from 1^-d. The labourer does not perform two operations at once, one in order to add value to the cotton, the other in order to pre- serve the value of the means of production, or, what amounts to the same thing, to transfer to the yarn, to the product, the value of the cotton on which he works, and part of the value of the spindle with which he works. On the other hand, he desires to realise the value of his commodity, to convert it into any other suitable commodity of equal value, irrespective of whether his own commodity has or has not any use-value for the owner of the other. If they are to be treated as direct expressions of the degree of self-expansion of capital, the following erroneous law would hold good: Sur- plus-labour or surplus-value can never reach 100%. (1. of Fact., 31st Oct., 1866, pp. It is once again the direct action of man on Nature which becomes an immediate source of greater accumulation, without the intervention of any new capital. The relative quantity pro- duced, or the increase per cent of the variable capital, is deter- mined, it is plain, by the ratio of the surplus-value to the variable s 90 capital, or is expressed by — . No doubt, M becomes M+AM, £100 become £110. The circulation of money as capital is, on the contrary, an end in itself, for the ex- pansion of value takes place only within this constanly renewed 1 "Capital is divisible ... He can annihilate all regularity of employment, and according to his own conve- nience, caprice, and the interest of the moment, make the most enormous over-work alternate with relative or absolute cessation of work. 1821, p. Just as a certain number of simultaneously employed labour- ers are the material pre-requisites for division of labour in manu- facture, so are the number and density of the population, which here correspond to the agglomeration in one workshop, a necessary condition for the division of labour in society. So far as the labour-process is purely individual, one and the same labourer unites in himself all the functions, that later on become separated. In the paper factories, where the paper is made by machinery, night-work is the rule for all processes, except rag-sorting. He wanted soldiers for his army and tax-payers for his treasury. 586.) MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OP COMMODITIES HI cles. A commodity is therefore a mysterious thing, simply because in it the social character of men's labour appears to them as an objective character stamped upon the product of that labour: because the relation of the producers to the sum total of their own labour is presented to them as a social relation, existing not between themselves, but between the products of their labour. This much, however, is clear, that the middle ages could not live on Catholicism, nor the ancient world on politics. The interdependent development of the Relative form of value, and of the Equivalent form The degree of development of the relative form of value corresponds to that of the equivalent form. The many individual capitals invested in a particular branch of production have, one with another, more or l^ss different com- positions. CO CO >*H *TH q ■mT) co oo CD lO •^H o oo oo OS CM t>- CM o CM 00 CD vl* CM u CO > o S ' "s g-^-1 11 >>3 a .sl Jt 2 Si IS o-j o O Pi s E. Incorrigible and dangerous rogues are to be branded with an R on the left shoulder and set to hard labour, and if they are caught begging again, to be executed without mercy. Their value therefore rises absolutely, but not in proportion to their mass. The crown lawyers, however, decided that the prescribed meal- times "must be in the interval during the working-hours, and 1 Reports, &c, for 31st October, 1848, pp 133, 134. of linen; this tautology expresses neither value, nor magnitude of value. hindered him from being a Christian.. a-week wages, when the manufac- turer cannot do it lor the 50 or 100 children lodged, boarded, superintended all together. The capitalist, for- merly a buyer, now returns to market as a seller, of commodities. The value of the means of production remaining the same, the value of each ar- ticle will fall to ninepence, made up of sixpence for the value of the means of production and threepence for the value newly added by the labour. The predominance, in a society, of this form of exploitation excludes the capitalist mode of production; to which mode, however, this form may serve as a transition, as it did towards the close of the middle ages. 8 From a letter of Mr. Harris, Chief Constable ot Bolton, in "Rep. Occupying areas of from 100 up to several thousand acres, each forms a compact whole producing all it requires. Paris, 1821, t. The following is a particularly successful receipt of this wonderful philosopher: "5 lbs. This occurs where sales and purchases on a very small scale are continually happening. It follows, then, that the nominal wages, the equivalent of labour-power expressed in money, will also be higher in the first nation than in the second; which does not at all prove that this holds also for the real wages, i.e., for the means of subsistence placed at the disposal of the labourer. Sec- ond, orphans and pauper children. But the meal-times consist of 1 hour for breakfast, ly hours for dinner, and — an hour for "noon-meate," i.e., exactly twice as much as under the factory acts now in force. In oppo- sition to Spinoza, it believes that "ignorance is a sufficient reason." The labour which is set in motion by the total capital of a so- ciety, day in, day out, may be regarded as a single collective work- ing-day. 7,659,727 . S'ils donnent cependant leur richesse acquise et accumulee en retourcontre ces produits nouveaux qui sont l'objet de leur fantaisie, ils semblent exposes a epuiser bientot leur fonds de reserve; ils ne travaillent point, avons-nous dit, et ils ne peuvent meme travailler; on croirait done que chaque jour d' it voir diminuer leurs vieilles richesses, et que lorsqu'il ne leur en restera plus, rien ne sera offert en echange aux ouvriers qui travaillent exclusivement pour eux.... At the same time the oxygen of the air is consumed by gas-lights. 589.) This same bourgeois is not ashamed to put this question: "Do you not think that the mine-owner also suffers loss from an explosion?" Finally, "Are not you workmen in Lancashire able to take care of your own interests without calling in the Govern- ment to help you?" "No." (n. But under the Ten Hours' Act they were a "grievous hardship." 2 They informed the inspectors in the coolest manner that they should place themselves above the letter of the law, and re-introduce the old system on their own account. of Fact., 30th April, 1858," p. On the one hand, therefore, the additional capital formed in the course of accumulation attracts fewer and fewer labourers in proportion to its magnitude. Accordingly, in France alone, in the first half of the 18th century, over 100 different kinds of silk stuffs were woven, and, in Avig- non, it was law, that "every apprentice should devote himself tr> only one sort of fabrication, and should not learn the preparation of several kinds of stuff at once." The territorial division of la- bour, which confines special branches of production to special dis- tricts of a country, acquires fresh stimulus from the manufactur- ing system, which exploits every special advantage. c. 6 In truth, however, value is here the active factor in a process, in which, while constantly assuming the form in turn of money and com- modities, it at the same time changes in magnitude, differentiates 1 "II mercante non conta quasi per niente il lucro fatto, ma mira sempre al futuro." (A. 54.) "The Proletarian, by selling his labour for a definite quantity of the necessaries of life, renounces all claim to a share in the product. 2 All well-developed forms of capitalist production being forms of co- operation, nothing is, of course, easier, than to make abstraction from their antagonistic character, and to transform them by a word into some form of free association, as is done by A. As in the natural body head and hand wait upon each other, so the labour-process unites the labour of the hand with that of the head. Misere de la Philosophie. The former determines the exchange-value of the la- bour-power, the latter is its use-value. "The heathen were able, by the light of reason, to conclude that a usurer is a double-dyed* thief and murderer. There the master is the absolute law-giver. If the paper money exceed its proper limit, which is the amount in gold coins of the like denomination that can actually be current, it would, apart from the danger of falling into general disrepute, represent only that quantity of gold, which, in accordance with the laws of the circulation of commodities, is required, and is alone capable of being represented by paper. If the whole working-day were to shrink to the length of this portion, surplus-labour would vanish, a consummation utterly impossible under the regime of capital. The country districts swept of children. 78, n. 6d.; the total yearly expenditure of a family of 6 persons, £36 12s. If on our earlier assumption the capitalist must advance 300s., in order to exploit 100 labourers a day, and if the rate of sur- plus-value amounts to 50%, this variable capital of 300s. From brighter, but exceptional scenes, it is requisite in the interests of justice, that attention should again be drawn to the overwhelming preponderance of facts which are a reproach to the civilisation of England. Some portion of the furniture and tools which they use is commonly made by themselves. In one scutching mill, at Kildinan, near Cork, there occurred between 1852 and 1856, six fatal accidents and sixty mutilations; every one of which might have been pre- vented by the simplest appliances, at the cost of a few shillings. If such an instrument has no value to lose, if, in other words, it is not the product of human labour, it transfers no value to the product. The pretext was shown on subsequent investigation to be a deliberate lie. Schouw: "Die Erde, die Pflanzen und der Mensch," 2. As inventions increased in number, and the demand for the newly discovered machines grew larger, the ma- chine-making industry split up, more and more, into numerous independent branches, and division of labour in these manufac- tures was more and more developed. Profits ... The indi- vidual consumption of the labourer, whether it proceed within the workshop or outside it, whether it be part of the process of produc- tion or not, forms therefore a factor of the production and reproduc- tion of capital; just as cleaning machinery does, whether it be done while the machinery is working or while it is standing. But the collective labourer, who consti- tutes the living mechanism of manufacture, is made up solely of such specialised detail labourers. The conditions of production are also those of reproduction. Hoarding The continual movement in circuits of the two antithetical metamorphoses of commodities, or the never ceasing alternation of sale and purchase, is reflected in the restless currency of money, or in the function that money performs of a perpetuum mobile of circulation. Senior, "lays down his spade, he renders useless, for that period, a capital worth eighteenpence. "The 12 corvee days of the 'Reglement organique' cried a Boyard drunk with victory, amount to 365 days in the year." 1 If the Reglement organique of the Danubian provinces was a positive expression of the greed for surplus-labour which every paragraph legalised, the English Factory Acts are the negative 1 Further details are to be found in E. . 1866. Now, a terrible reaction set in, that even at this hour (the end of March, 1867) continues in this and other London industries. During the very first storms of the revolution, the French bourgeoisie dared to take away from the workers the right of association but just acquired. By nature un- fitted to make anything independently, the manufacturing labour- er develops productive activity as a mere appendage of the capital- 1 "It is not sufficient that the capital" (the writer should have said the necessary means of subsistence and of production) "required for the sub- division of handicrafts should be in readiness in the society: it must also be accumulated in the hands of the employers in sufficiently large quantities to enable them to conduct their operations ona large scale.... The more revolting the occupation, the more certain it is to receive the minimum of remuneration... If I now sell a second quarter of corn, money indeed flows back to me, not however as a sequel to the first transaction, but in consequence of its repetition. At the same time, though with diminishing vitality, the machine as a whole continues to take part in the labour-process. Like all others it has a value. The isolation of such functions, their allot- ment to a particular labourer, does not become advantageous till after an increase in the number of labourers employed; but this increase must affect every group proportionally. Thus, e.g., Mr. Snell reports it to be a common oc- currence in Somersetshire that, when a poor person claims parish relief, he is compelled to take his children from school. The rapid improvement of machinery, during the crisis, allowed the English manufacturers, immediately after the termination of the American Civil War, and almost in no time, to glut the markets of the world again. So soon as that shortening becomes compulsory, machinery be- comes in the hands of capital the objective means, systemati- cally employed for squeezing out more -labour in a given time. The defects of the expanded relative value-form are reflected in the corresponding equivalent form. And how? pepper and sweet herbs, in all 20— d.; make a soup for 64 men, and at the medium price of barley and of Indian corn .... Technology discloses man's mode of dealing with Nature, the process of pro- duction by which he sustains his life, and thereby also lays bare the mode of formation of his social relations, and of the mental conceptions that flow from them. But, as we have already seen, it is capable of being so replaced only in so far as it functions exclusively as coin, or as the circulating medium, and as nothing else. The tender-hearted English Parliament long affected to shrink from taking this step. There is a very great consumption of luxuries among the labour- ing poor of this kingdom: particularly among the manufacturing populace, by which they also consume their time, the most fatal of consumptions." "An Essay on Trade and Commerce, &c," p. It destroys both the ancient and the transi- tional forms, behind which the dominion of capital is still in part concealed, and replaces them by the direct and open sway of capital; but thereby it also generalises the direct opposition to this sway. A given working-day, therefore, no longer creates a constant, but a variable value; in a day of 12 hours of ordinary intensity, the value created is, say 6 shillings, but with increased intensity, the value created may be 7, 8, or more shillings. * 1 This incongruity between the magnitude ot value and its relative expression has, with customary ingenuity, been exploited by vulgar econ- COMMODITIES 55 3. He will, caeteris paribus, labour 6 days a week as before, 3 for himself, 3 for his lord, who thenceforth becomes a wages- paying capitalist. of Insp. The £2 thus make four moves. An extraneous element weighs the balance heavily against him .... In all European countries in which the conscrip- tion holds, since its introduction, the medium height of adult men, and generally their fitness for military service, has diminished. In the circulation G — M — G, the money is in the end con- verted into a commodity, that serves as a use-value; it is spent once for all. 417.) Macaulay might have reported- fur- ther that "extremely well-disposed" amis du commerce in the 17th century, narrate with "exultation" how in a poorhouse in Holland a child of four was employed, and that this example of "vertu mise en pratique" passes muster in all the humanitarian works, a la Macaulay, -to the time of Adam Smith. m., and all after that is over- time, and we seldom leave off working before 6 p. Here, on one side of Gaick, you have the new forest of Glenfeshie; and there on the other you have the new forest of Ardverikie. Only in so far as paper money represents gold, which like all other commodities has value, is it a symbol of value. And lastly, a particular kind of commodity acquires the character of universal equivalent, because all other commodities make it the material in which they uniformly express their value. In addition to its special use-value as a commodity (gold, for instance, serving to stop teeth, to form the raw material of articles of luxury, &c), it acquires a formal use-value, originat- ing in its specific social function. If the quantity of paper money issued be double what it ought to be, then, as a matter of fact, £1 would 1 1 be the money-name not of -r of an ounce, but of -~ of an ounce of gold. m., 3 with pauses of not less than 1— hours for meal-times, these meal-times to be allowed at one and the same time for all, and conformably to the conditions of 1844. Both could only have been manufactured in England. Is it worth while to keep the machinery (he means the living labour machines) in order, and is it not the greatest folly to think of parting with that? One after one the liber- ties of the people have been cloven down. Laing estimates that in England (and Wales) the livelihood of 11,300,000 people depends on unskilled labour. c, pp 915, 916.) 120 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION morphosis consists, are gone through, not simultaneously, but suc- cessively. We left him just after he had purchased, in the open market, all the necessary factors of the labour-process; its objective factors, the means of production, as well as its subjective factor, labour-power. *j « eo g« 3 ■C 3 c o j) ra w <V 3 C ro CD 3 C <u «E« — o ChSS QAwS QiV.5& Pnfe 6 WO 14.9 598 Wigan 644 18.0 Cotton 42.6 708 Blackburn 734 34.9 Do. 37.3 547 Halifax 564 20.4 Worsted 41.9 611 Bradford 603 30.0 Do. 31.0 691 Macclesfield 804 26.0 Silk 14.9 588 Leek 705 17.2 Do. 36.6 721 Stoke-upon-Trent 665 19.3 Earthenware 30.4 726 Woolstanton Eight healthy agricultural 727 13.9 Do. 305 districts 340 1 It is well known with what reluctance the English "Free-traders'* gave up the protective duty on the silk manufacture. Consequently, two-thirds of the workmen are discharged. . They scented some profit in it, and let the sea-shore to the great fishmongers of London. 18,841,326 yds. lxxii., n. The smell of their fish rose to the noses of the great men. 3 "Gang work is cheaper than other work; that is why they are em- ployed," says a former gang-master (1. . "the rich grow rapidly richer, whilst there is no perceptible advance in the comfort enjoyed by 1 Gladstone in the House of Commons, April 16th, 1863. He then asked for what he had made over and above the 78 hours per week, but was refused. In all, 14 days in the year. John Stuart Mill, with his usual eclectic logic, understands how to hold at the same time the view of his father, James Mill, and the opposite view. First, the falling of wages below their minimum; second, the degree in which the agricultural labourer was a com- pound of wage-labourer and pauper, or the degree in which he had been turned into a serf of his parish. He revolts against this particular form of the means of production, as being the material basis of the capitalist mode of production. "It has happened in times past that these Oriental States, after supplying the expenses of their civil and military establish- ments, have found themselves in possession of a surplus which they could apply to works of magnificence or utility and in the con- struction of these their command over the hands and arms of almost the entire non-agricultural population has produced stupendous monuments which still indicate their power. The immediate producer, the labourer, could only dispose of his own person after he had ceased to be attached to the soil and ceased to be the slave, serf, or bondman of another. . A spider conducts operations that resemble those of a weaver, and a bee puts to shame many an architect in the construction of her cells. 8 The agitation for a working-day of 8 hours has now (1867) begun in Lancashire among the factory operatives. M. A fixed minimum of efficiency in all la- bour is therefore assumed, and we shall see, later on, that capital- ist production provides the means of fixing this minimum. He ex- changes it for the £2, and then, like a man of the good old stamp that he is, he parts with the £2 for a family Bible of the same price. The beautiful and romantic valleys of Derbyshire, Not- tinghamshire and Lancashire, secluded from the public eye, became the dismal solitudes of torture, and of many a murder. 2., p. chiefly from their small tenants, who are obliged to attend when required to do the land- lord's work, at rates of wages, in many instances, considerably under the current rates paid to ordinary labourers, and without regard to the inconvenience or loss to the tenant of being obliged to neglect his own business at critical periods of sowing or reaping." 6 The uncertainty and irregularity of employment, the constant return and long duration of gluts of labour, all these symptoms of a relative surplus-population, figure therefore in the reports of the Poor Law administration, as so many hardships of the agri- cultural proletariat. This I attribute ... " 3 The Inquiry-Commission of 1861 led, however, to the unexpected result, that in some purely agricultural districts bordering on the North Sea, the death-rate of children under one year old almost equalled that of the worst factory districts. For instance, the pumps with which the Dutch, in 1836-7, emptied the Lake of Harlem, were constructed on the principle of ordinary pumps; the only difference being, that their pistons were driven by Cy- clopean steam-engines, instead of by men. The man Avorked in the stone yard of the workhouse for a certain ra- tion of food, and threepence per day. The variation of the work- ing-day fluctuates, therefore, within physical and social bounds. The coat is a use-value that satisfies a particular want. A certain 10 per cent, will ensure its employment anywhere; 20 per cent, cer- tain will produce eagerness; 50 per cent., positive audapity; 100 per cent, will make it ready to trample on all human laws; 300 per cent., and there is not a crime at which it will scruple, nor a risk it will not run, even to the chance of its owner being hanged. In this sense every commodity is a symbol, since, in so far as it is value, it is only the material envelope of the human labour spent upon it. five years back, now only brings them 3s. Econ.," p. These exist quietly side by side, so long as the ratio of the value of silver to that of gold remains unchanged, say, at 15 : 1. . . Wherever it appears, the abolition of serfdom has been long effected, and the highest 716 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION development of the middle ages, the existence of sovereign towns, has been long on the wane. He opposes himself to Nature as one of her own forces, setting in motion arms and legs, head and hands, the natural forces of his body, in order to appropriate Nature's productions in a form adapted to his own wants. 2 Gladstone's next Budget speech of April 7th, 1864, is a Pindaric dithyrambus on the advance of surplus-value-making and the happiness of the people "tempered by poverty." He speaks of masses "on the bor- der" of pauperism, of branches of trade in which "wages have not increased," and finally sums up the happiness of the working- class in the words: "human life is but, in nine cases out of ten, a struggle for existence."* Professor Fawcett, not bound like Gladstone by official considerations, declares roundly: "I do not, of course, deny that money wages have been augmented by this increase of capital (in the last ten years), but this apparent advan- tage is to a great extent lost, because many of the necessaries of life are becoming dearer" (he believes because of the fall in value of the precious metals). Mill, "Elements, &c." Translated by Parissot. As to the cheapening of the means of subsistence, the official statistics, e.g., the accounts of the Lon- don Orphan Asylum, show an increase in price of 20% for the average of the three years 1860-1862, compared with 1851-1853. The value of every commodity is now, by being equated to linen, not only differentiated from its own use-value, but from all other use-values generally, and is, by that very fact, expressed as that which is common to all commodities. The life of myriads of workmen and work- women is now uselessly tortured and shortened by the never- ending physical suffering that their mere occupation begets." 1 In illustration of the way in which the workrooms influence the state of health Dr. Simon gives the following table of mortality. This circumstance has given rise to the wildest theories. Those values that were previously expressed by the price of £1 would now be expressed by the price of £2. Besides this, he includes the wages of the people employed at odd times to keep the machinery in working order. From the moment that the tool prop- er is taken from man, and fitted into a mechanism, a machine takes the place of a mere implement. Piece-wages become, from this point of view, the most fruitful source of reductions of wages and capitalistic cheating. But the labour-time necessary for the production of 20 yards of linen or 1 coat varies with every change in the productiveness of weaving or tailoring. 165. But this, under the conditions supposed above, depends on the mass of labour-power, or the number of labourers whom he exploits, and this number in its turn is determined by the amount of the variable capital ad- vanced. 3 The accumulation of capital was attended at the same time by its concentration and centralisation. In the second part of his work Pagnini directs his polemics especially against the lawyers. If the professor then found, that in accordance with the calculation of the manufacturers, the workman reproduced or replaced his wages in 2 half-hours, in that case, he should have continued his analysis thus: According to your figures, the workman in the last hour but one produces his wages, and in the last hour your surplus-value or net profit. . We have seen how, along with the continual fluctuations in the ex- tent and rapidity of the circulation of commodities and in their prices, the quantity of money current unceasingly ebbs and flows. 2 On the other hand, the remaining r^ths of the product, or 4 lbs. Here, however, he comes to a stop, and gives up the further anal- ysis of the form of value. A still great- er contributing factor here is the relative decrease in the requirement of silver for articles of general use and for luxuries, that is its replacement by plated goods, aluminium, etc. You might as well, said one of the better kind to a chaplain of Southallfield, try to raise and improve the devil as a brickie, sir!" 1 As to the manner in which capital effects an economy in the requisites of labour, in modern Manufacture (in which I include all workshops of larger size, except factories proper), official and 1 "Ch. Empl. Comm., Ill Rep.," p 13, n 144, p. But such a state of reciprocal independence has no existence in a primitive society based on property in common, whether such a society takes the form of a patriarchal family, an ancient Indian community, or a Peruvian Inca State. c, pp. They were displaced by slaves. . ii. c, p. He is then engaged in a rapid and continuous labour for about five hours— throwing out the dough, 'scaling it off,' moulding it, putting it into the oven, preparing and baking rolls and fancy bread, taking the batch bread out of the oven, and up in- to the shop, &c, &c. 674 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION may in time prove that the whole kingdom will consist of only gentry and beggars, or of grandees and slaves." 1 Nevertheless, the position of the English agricultural labour- er from 1770 to 1780, with regard to his food and dwelling, as well as to his self-respect, amusements, &c, is an ideal never attained again since that time. Good heavens! a nation divided into agricultural and commercial interests, calling itself sane; nay, styling itself enlightened and civilised, not only in spite of, but in consequence of this monstrous and unnatural division." (David Urquhart, 1. Edited by Gen. 3 The handicraft period bequeathed to us the great inventions of the compass, of gunpowder, of type-printing, and of the auto- matic clock. Consequently, we see, first, that the addition of new value takes place not by vir- tue of his labour being spinning in particular, or joineringin particular, but because it is labour in the abstract, a portion of the total labour of society; and we see next, that the value added is of a given definite amount, not because his labour has a special utility, but because it is exerted for a definite time. Industries compared as regards health. 5d.; their total income, £29 18s.; deficit made good by the par- ish, £6 14s. With the help of mechanical force, they destroy the monopoly that male labour had of the heav- ier work, and they drive off from the lighter work numbers of old women and very young children. Connected with the illusion mentioned in the text, is the really won- derful dogma, left by him as an inheritance to Political Economy, the dogma, that the price of commodities is made up of wages, profit (interest) and rent, i.e., of wages and surplus-value. The value of the goods annually bought and sold in any country requires a certain quantity of money to circulate and dis- tribute them to their proper consumers, and can give employment to no more. Rep.," p. 10.3 Mangold-wurzel, 14,073 14,839 316 Mangold-wurzel, 10.5 Cabbages, . 2 If money, according to Augier, a "comes into the world with a congenital blood-stain on one cheek," capital comes dripping from head to foot, from every pore, with blood and dirt. 1,091,373,930 lbs. The ground would pasture 15,000 sheep, and as it was not more than one-thirtieth part of the old forest ground in Scotland ... 7, 52, 53. c, p. the par- tition of a process into its essential constituents, for the division or gradua- tion of labour among artisans." (Andrew Ure: "The Philosophy of Manufac- tures," Lond., 1835, p. l Whilst the modern Factory Acts com- pulsorily shortened the working-day, the earlier statutes tried to lengthen it by compulsion. [110J111). en B o a (~ S o c CO CO a; ■O bi CO 00 0) J tl) CO, 03 •a 73 <o . leprincipe de la division du travail s'y revet d'un caractere special II y a bien des devideuses, des moulineurs. It did not pre- vent Mr. Fawcett saying in the same breath: "The aggregate wealth which is annually saved in England, is divided into two portions; one portion is employed as capital to maintain our industry, and the other portion is exported to foreign countries... For instance the cattle-breeder produces hides, the tanner makes the hides into leather, and the shoemaker, the leather into boots. (Sismondi, 1. One portion serves as fresh means of production and remains social. We assume the waste to be 6%: under these circumstances 10,600 lbs. It is true that by means of the elementary form, the value of a commodity A, becomes expressed in terms of one, and only one, other commodity. But this advance once made, the purely mechanical working of the soil itself pro- duces a marvellous effect on the amount of the product. 520 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION development in the conditions of production. SECTION 2.— THE GREED FOR SURPLUS-LABOUR. For it origi- nated for the exchange of commodities, but interest makes out of money, more money. The less business there is, the more profit has to be made on the busi- ness done. the manufacturer, who labours four days, has a surplus of money to live idle with the rest of the week .... The rent was payable weekly, whether the looms worked or not. In other words, a sale is a purchase, C — M is also M— C. Under these circum- stances the price of a working-hour is 3d., the value produced in it is 6d. There alone had the popu- lation formerly found shelter from the incessant floods of the winter-time. We should have G=(0+v) = v or C the expanded capital =v+s and therefore C— G = s as before. More women and children were compelled by necessitous circumstances, to enter upon laborious occupations, and former workmen were, from the same cause, obliged to devote a greater portion of their time to increase production." ("Essays on Pol.Econ., in which are Illustrated the Principal Causes of the Present National Distress." Lond., 1830, p. 185. dwindled to eight or ten. In this first form of value, therefore, it is difficult to grasp the polar contrast. It is accordingly a maxim of slave management, in slave-importing countries, that the most effective economy is that which takes out of the human chattel in the shortest space of time the utmost amount of exertion it is capable of putting forth. If the foreign trade, forced upon Japan by Europeans, should lead to the substitution of money rents for rents in kind, it will be all up with the exemplary agriculture of that country. Our next visit was to an iron labourer's wife, whose husband had worked in the yards. * But, when considering the capitalist mode of production, he, on the contrary, treats the work of control made necessary by the co- operative character of the labour-process as identical with the dif- ferent work of control, necessitated by the capitalist character of that process and the antagonism of interests between capitalist and labourer. 116.) THE LABOUR-PROCESS 179 not every subject of labour is raw material: it can only become so, after it has undergone some alteration by means of labour. On the other hand, if the mass of labour-power employed, or the amount of variable capital, increases, but not in proportion to the fall in the rate of surplus-value, the mass of the surplus-value produced, falls. 84, n. 20. But the value of a commodity is determined, not only by the quan- tity of labour which the labourer directly bestows upon that com- modity, but also by the labour contained in the means of produc- tion. I., p. The extra labour expended in flax-spinning real- ised itself formerly in extra income to numerous peasant families, or maybe, in Frederick II. It is otherwise in the value- relation of one commodity to another. 281: "The former may have gained what the other has lost." 3 "The man of knowledge and the productive labourer come to be widely divided from each other, and knowledge, instead of remaining the handmaid of labour in the hand of the labourer to increase his productive pow- ers ... 120. Therefore the labour contained in the raw material and the instruments of labour can be treated just as if it were la- bour expended in an earlier stage of the spinning process, before the labour of actual spinning commenced. I worked two nights last week." Fernyhough, a boy often: "I have not always an hour (for dinner). By a Suffolk Gentleman." Ipswich, 1795, p. For this period I refer the reader to "Die Lage der arbeitenden Klasse in England," von Friedrich Engels, Leipzig, 1845. 41 45. "The rich had got possession of the greater part of the undivided land. He was not killed, but died like other people. E.g., with the division of labour in manufacture, and with the use of machinery, more raw material is worked up in the same time, and, therefore, a greater mass of raw material and auxiliary sub- stances enter into the labour-process. x Suppose a capitalist to employ 100 workmen, at £30 a year each, in a carpet factory. c, Lecture ILL) 322 CHAPTER XIII CO-OPERATION Capitalist production only then really begins, as we have alrea- dy seen, when each individual capital employs simultaneously a comparatively large number of labourers; when consequently the labour-process is carried on on an extensive scale and yields, rel- atively, large quantities of products. 1663-1667). * The necessity for a generalisation of the Factory Acts, for transforming them from an exceptional law relating to mechanical spinning and weaving — those first creations of machinery — into a law affecting social production as a whole, arose, as we have seen, from the mode in which Modern Industry was historically developed. This price which always finally predominates over the accidental market prices of labour and regulates them, this "necessary price" (physiocrats) or "natu- ral price" of labour (Adam Smith) can, as with all other commod- ities, be nothing else than its value expressed in money. Human machinery will rust under inaction, oil and rub it as you may. 'Is the trade worth retaining?' asks Mr. Potter. in great part dependent for their work- ing on such cottage-owners as the one from whom his (the labour- er's) hovel is rented. 165-167 As to the advantages of large scale, com- pared with small scale, industries, see "Ch. Empl. The character and tendency of the process M — G — M, is therefore not due to any qualitative difference between its extremes, both being money, but solely to their quantitative difference. In previous chapters we saw the destructive consequences of over- work; here we find the sources of the sufferings that result to the labourer from his in- sufficient employment. Apart from this, with capitalist produc- tion an altogether new force comes into play— the credit system, which* in its first stages furtively creeps in as the humble as- sistant of accumulation, drawing into the hands of individual or associated capitalists, by invisible threads, the money resources which lie scattered, over the surface of society, in larger or smaller amounts; but it soon becomes a new and terrible weapon in the battle of competition and is finally transformed into an enormous social mechanism for the centralisation of capitals. for the first time se- cured right of property for the peasants. a week. But a watch can; and William Petty used it to illustrate the division of labour in manufacture. By Noblesse Oblige." London, 1879.— F. lay ... This social need is met by early marriages, a necessary consequence of the condi- tions in which the labourers of modern industry live, and by the premium that the exploitation of children sets on their pro- duction. And with the rise of national debt-making, want of faith in the national debt takes the place of the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, which may not be forgiven. in what proportions the products are exchangeable? passim.) 2 "Commodities (here used in the sense of use-values) are not the ter- minating object of the trading capitalist, money is his terminating object." (Th. Chalmers, "On Pol. The exploitation of the labourer by capital is here effected through the exploitation of the labourer by the labourer. In the production of a definite mass of surplus-value, there- fore, the decrease of one factor may be compensated by the in- crease of the other. "The Rev. xxvi. The use-values, coat, linen, &c, i.e., the bodies of commodi- ties, are combinations of two elements— matter and labour. In such forms capital has not yet acquired the direct control of the labour-process. As soon as the working-class, stunned at first by the noise and turmoil of the new system of production, recovered, in some measure, its senses, its resistance began, and first in the native land of machinism, in England. for the Netherlands (October, 1537), the first edict of the States and Towns of Holland (March 10, 1614), the "Plakaat" of the United Provinces (June 26, 1649), &c. to 6 p. * During the manufacturing period proper, i.e., the period dur- ing which manufacture is the predominant form taken by capital- ist production, many obstacles are opposed to the full develop- ment of the peculiar tendencies of manufacture. But at the same time, whilst his labour produces wealth, that wealth would, were he called on to consume it himself, make him less fit for labour." According to him, "men" [i.e., non-workers] "would probably prefer to do without all artistic perfection, and all the enjoyments that manufacturers procure for us, if it were necessary that all should buy them by constant toil like that of the labourer. Only read Diodorus Siculus. Of course this holds good only so long as the value-relation exists, in which the coat stands in the position of equivalent to the linen. 39.) 3 These various functions are liable to come into dangerous conllict with one another whenever gold and silver have also to serve as a fund for the conversion of bank-notes. We saw in Part IV., when analysing the production of relative surplus-value: within the capitalist system all methods for raising the social productiveness of labour are brought about at the cost of the individual labourer; all means for the develop- ment of production transform themselves into means of domi- nation over, and exploitation of, the producers; they mutilate the labourer into a fragment of a man, degrade him to the level of an appendage of a machine, destroy every remnant of charm in his work and turn it into a hated toil; they estrange from him the intellectual potentialities of the labour-process in the same proportion as science is incorporated in it as an independent pow- er; they distort the conditions under which he works, subject him during the labour-process to a despotism the more hateful for its meanness; they transform his life-time into working-time, and drag his wife and child beneath the wheels of the Juggernaut of capital. The law-makers were so far from wishing to trench on the freedom of capital to exploit adult labour-power, or, as they called it, "the freedom of labour," that they created a special system in order to prevent the Factory Acts from having a con- sequence so outrageous. lbs. The advance of capitalist production develops a working-class, which by education, tra- dition, habit, looks upon the conditions of that mode of produc- tion as self-evident laws of Nature. Hence, when money enters on its functions as a measure of value, when it expresses prices, its value is already determined. 2. 3 Wherever the nature of the process did not in- volve production on a large scale, the new industries that have sprung up in the last few decades, such as envelope making, steel- pen making, &c, have, as a general rule, first passed through the handicraft stage, and then the manufacturing stage, as short phases of transition to the factory stage. On entering that process, they become incorporated with capital. "The Advantages of the East India Trade, 1720.'* John Bellers, 1. It will suffice merely to refer to certain intermediate forms, in which surplus-labour is not extorted by direct compulsion from the producer, nor the producer himself yet formally subjected to capital. That which comes directly face to face with the possessor of money on the market, is in fact not labour, but the labourer. On the other hand, the number and extent of his so-called necessary wants, as also the modes of satisfying them, are them- selves the product of historical development, and depend there- fore to a great extent on the degree of civilisation of a country, more particularly on the conditions under which, and consequent- ly on the habits and degree of comfort in which, the class of free labourers has been formed. They manifest themselves therefore as commodities, or have the form of com- modities, only in so far as they have two forms, a physical or natural form, and a value-form. Not only is there, therefore, an increase of surplus-value, but the outlay necessary to obtain it diminishes. This power must be ap- plied with the average amount of exertion and with the usual degree of intensity; and the capitalist is as careful to see that this is done, as that his workmen are not idle for a single moment. The division of labour in the workshop implies con- centration of the means of production in the hands of one capitalist; the division of labour in society implies their dispersion among many independent producers of commodities. The dissolution of the latter set free the elements of the former. 11, n. The cure will not be perfect, till our manufacturing poor are contented to labour six days for the same sum which they now earn in four days." 3 To this end, and for "extirpating idleness, debauchery and excess," promoting a spirit of industry, "lowering the price of labour in our manufactories, and easing the lands of the heavy burden of poor's rates," our "faithful Eckart" of capital proposes this approved device: to shut up such labourers as become dependent on public support, in a word, paupers, in "an ideal workhouse." Such ideal workhouse must be made a "House of Terror," and not an asylum for the poor, "where they are to be plentifully fed, warmly and decently clothed, and where they do but little work." 4 In this "House of Terror," this "ideal workhouse, the poor shall work 14 hours in a day, al- 1 "An Essay," &c. With the growth of the total capital, its variable constituent or the labour incorporated in it, also does increase, but in a constantly diminishing proportion. It is clear that this direct dependence of the operations, and there- fore of the labourers, on each other, compels each one of them to spend on his work no more than the necessary time, and thus a continuity, uniformity, regularity, order, 1 and even intensity of labour, of quite a different kind, is begotten than is to be found in an independent handicraft or even in simple co-operation. he pays the landowner his rent, the labourer his wages, the tax and tithe gatherer their claims, and keeps a large, indeed the largest, and a continually augmenting share, of the annual produce of labour for himself. In 1836, 12,000 wind-mills of 6,000 horse-power were still employed in Hol- land, to prevent two-thirds of the land from being reconverted into morasses. The Factory Act of 1861 regulates the actual making of the lace, so far as it is done by machinery, and this is the rule in England. Custom stamps them as values with definite magni- tudes. These statutes, legally binding until the beginning of the 18th century, were only re- pealed by 12 Anne, c. Or superfluous wealth that does not exist? We know that the daily value of labour-power is calculated upon a certain length of the labourer's life, to which, again, cor- responds a certain length of working-day. Comm. The reader knows that during the last 20 years, the flax industry has very much extended, and that, with that extension, the number of scutching mills in Ireland has increased. A silk manufacturer naively states to the Children's Employment Commissioners: "I am quite sure that the true secret of producing efficient workpeople is to be found in uniting education and labour from a period of childhood. 84, n. x For example, in the manufacture of envelopes, one man folded the paper with the folder, another laid on the gum, a third turned the flap over, on which the device is impressed, a fourth em- bossed the device, and so on; and for each of these operations the envelope had to change hands. The zero of their cost is theiefore a limit in a mathematical sense, always beyond reach, although we can always approximate more and more nearly to it. It is not the capital, but the use of the capital productively, which is the cause of profits." (John Cazenove,l. The wear and tear of a machine is not exactly proportional to its working-time. 2 I. For example, the price of one hour of the 12 hours' working-day is 3d., say the value-product of half a work- ing-hour, whilst the price of the over-time working-hour is 4d., or the value-product of -^ of a working-hour. 1777, pp. 114, 115, n. From the children we may form an opinion as to the adults, especially the girls and women, and that in a branch of industry by the side of which cotton-spinning appears an agreeable and healthful occupation. The different detail processes, which were successive in time, have become simultaneous, go on side by side in space. In the forge the hours are from 12 to 12. For the begotten are like those who beget them. And this loss becomes positive and absolute as soon as the intermission of their employment necessitates additional outlay at the recommencement of work. In that world the productions of the human brain appear as independent beings endowed with life, and entering into relation both with one another and the human race. 2 Hence this subversion of agriculture puts on, at first, more the appearance of a political revolution. In the complete metamorphosis of the linen, for example, linen — money — Bible, the linen first falls out of circulation, and money steps into its place. 83, n. 6, § 32. This occurs every time that, the price of la- bour (reckoned per working-hour) remaining constant, the working- day is prolonged beyond its customary length. In certain circumstances he becomes a slave. 7(56 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION of the two modes of production. directly or indirectly securing to himself the profit on a man employed at 10s. Use-values must therefore never be looked upon as the real aim of the capitalist; 2 neither must the profit on any single transac- tion. . 592 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION by him, because he does not eat it, i.e., because he performs the function of a capitalist, and enriches himself. 142.) "The share of the product which comes to the labourer in the form of wages." (J. . The official list of paupers numbered in England 2 851,369 persons; in 1856, 877,767; in 1865, 971,433. As co-operators, as members of a working organism, they are but special modes of existence of capital. It becomes plain, that it is not the exchange of commodities which regulates the magnitude of their value; but, on the contrary, that it is the magnitude of their value which controls their exchange proportions. 2 Now, the same children and young persons were shifted from the spinning-room to the weaving-room, now, during 15 hours, from one factory to another. We must still pause a moment on this element of primitive accumulation. 2 In contradistinction therefore to the case of other commodities, there enters into the determination of the value of labour-power a historical and moral element. In other words, the value of a commodity obtains independent and definite expression, by taking the form of exchange-value. Centralisation may result from a mere change in the distribution of capitals already existing, from a simple alteration in the quantitative grouping of the component parts of social capital. But if we abstract from their use-value, there remains their Value as defined above. If machine makers would only invent a self-sweeper, by whose use the necessity for these little children to creep under the machinery might be prevented, it would be a happy addition to our protective measures." ("Reports of Insp. Lastly the number of spindles increased by 1,612,541, while the number of opera- tives decreased by 50,505 The" temporary" misery, inflicted on the workpeople by the cotton-crisis, was heightened, and from being temporary made permanent, by the rapid and persistent progress of machinery. 8 Child. You would persuade us, by the example of David Hume, Esq., that atheism is the only cordial for low spirits, and the proper antidote against the fear of death... Comm., V. Rh. Z. xlviii), as the reason, why a very large part of the working-class, although THE BUYING AND SELLING OF LABOUR-POWER 175 purchase or as .a means of payment, this makes no alteration in the nature of the exchange of commodities. With regard to this subject, we may notice two methods characteristic of apologetic economy. They are there to absorb surplus-labour, and naturally absorb more in 24 hours than in 12. 472-475. Therefore since his wages 3 are produced in 5^- hours, and the yarn produced in one hour also 3 contains 5y hours' work, there is no witchcraft in the result, that 3 the value created by his 5-r- hours' spinning, is equal to the value of the product spun in one hour. 62.) The word labour is here wrongly used for labour-power. 1 "A family of four grown-up persons, with two children as winders, earned at the end of the last, and the beginning of the present century, by ten hours' daily labour, £4 a week. Labour-power is only saleable so far as it preserves the means of production in their capacity of capital, reproduces its own value as capital, and yields in unpaid labour a source of additional capital. They trusted in the conditions of the time, that these possessions would not be again taken from them, and bought, therefore, some of the pieces of land lying near theirs, and belonging to the poor, with the acquiescence of their owners, and took some EXPROPRIATION OP AGRICULTURAL POPULATION 727 usurpation of the common lands and the revolution in agricul- ture accompanying this, told so acutely on the agricultural labourers that, even according to Eden, between 1765 and 1780, their wages began to fall below the minimum, and to be supple- mented by official poor-law relief. But in the process of production the place of the £90 is taken by the labour-power in action, dead labour is replaced by living la- bour, something stagnant by something flowing, a constant by a variable. . A great stock, though with small profits, generally increases faster than a small stock with great profits." (1. the division is not near so obvious." (A. It may be called primitive accumulation, because it is the historic basis, instead of the historic result of specifically capitalist production. Ch. Ganilh," 2eme ed., Paris, 1821, t. In the first case the capitalist appropriates to himself one-half, in the second, one- third of the working-hour without paying for it. Use-value is, by no means, the thing "qu'on aime pour lui-meme" in the production of commodities. . . . In so far as it is not immediate transformation of slaves and serfs into wage-labourers, and therefore a mere change of form, it only means the expropriation of the immediate producers, i.e., the dissolution of private prop- erty based on the labour of its owner. l Though a commodity may, side by side with its actual form (iron, for instance), take in our imagination the form of gold, yet it cannot at one and the same time actually be both iron and gold. These gentlemen would do well, to ponder, once in a way, over Spinoza's: "Determinate est Negatio." 1 Senior, 1. In other words, its absolute amount decreases, but its amount, relatively to the total value of the product, of a pound of yarn, for instance, increases. In the code which the influence of the slave-owners, shortly before the outbreak of the American Civil War, imposed on the territory of New Mexico, it is said that the labourer, in as much as the capitalist has bought his labour-power, "is his (the capitalist's) money." The same view was current among the Roman patricians. If capi- talist production were introduced, the honest fellow would per- haps have to work six days a week, in order to appropriate to himself the product of one working-day. "To qualify them for the work which they have to do, they require no intellectual training; there is little room in it for skill, and less for judgment; their wages, though rather high for boys, do not increase propor- tionately as they grow up, and the majority of them cannot look for advancement to the better paid and more responsible post of machine minder, because while each machine has but one minder, it has at least two, and often four boys attached to it." 2 As soon as they get too old for such child's work, that is about 17 at the latest, they are discharged from the printing establishments. This bred a decay of people, and (by consequence) a decay of towns, churches, tithes, and the like .... Their owner must, therefore, lend them his tongue, or hang a ticket on them, before their prices can be communi- cated to the outside world. Human labour is therefore accumulated in it. That portion of the working-class, thus by machinery rendered superfluous, i. The extreme badness is in the high number of men found in one room, in the smallness of the ground- plot on which a great number of houses are thrust, the want of water, the absence of privies, and the frequent placing of one house on the top of another, or distribution into flats, . Therefore, it claimed and obtained the enjoyment not only of making children of 8 drudge without intermission from 2 to 8.30 p. The very nature of the circulation of commodi- ties begets the opposite appearance. "Consider my abstinence; I might have played ducks and drakes with the 15 shillings; but instead of that I con- sumed it productively, and made yarn with it." Very well, and by way of reward he is now in possession of good yarn instead of a bad conscience; and as for playing the part of a miser, it would never do for him to relapse into such bad ways as that; we have 1 This is the fundamental proposition on which is based the doctrine of the Physiocrats as to the unproductiveness of all labour that is not agri- culture: it is irrefutable for the orthodox economist. "If China," says Mr. Stapleton, M.P., to his constituents, "should become a great manufacturing country, I do not see how the manufactu- ring population of Europe could sustain the contest without descending to the level of their competitors." (Times, Sept. Since, however, the addition of new value to the subject of his labour, and the pres- ervation of its former value, are two entirely distinct results, produced simultaneously by the labourer, during one operation, it is plain that this two-fold nature of the result can be explained only by the two-fold nature of his labour; at one and the same time, it must in one character create value, and in another charac- ter preserve or transfer value. It became real money, by the general alienation of commodities, by actually changing places with their natural forms as useful objects, and thus becoming in reality the embodi- ment of their values. But in the weav- ing department, where, moreover, many sorts of figured fancy articles were woven, there was not the slightest alteration in the conditions of the work. The more carefully we examine the history of the past, the more reason shall we find to dissent from those who imagine that our age has been fruitful of new social evils. — F. Its force increases with the accumulation of capital. Labour-power is sold to-day, not with a view of satisfying, by its service or by its product, the personal needs of the buyer. Ine ratio „, . It, in fact, trans- forms, within certain limits, the labourer's necessary consumption- fund into a fund for the accumulation of capital. According to the census of 1861, the pop- ulation of England and Wales was 20,066,244; of these, 9,776,259 males, and 10,289,965 females. 31st, 1866, proves by comparative statistics with Continental states, that in spite of lower wages and much longer working-time, Continental labour is, in propor- tion to the product, dearer than English. With accumulation, and the development of the productiveness of labour that accompanies it, the power of sudden expansion of capital grows also; it grows, not merely because the elasticity of the capital already function- ing increases, not merely because the absolute wealth of society expands, of which capital only forms an elastic part, not merely because credit, under every special stimulus, at once places an unusual part of this wealth at the disposal of production in the form of additional capital; it grows, also, because the technical conditions of the process of production themselves — machinery, means of transport, &c. p. Blanqui the economist, not the Revolu- tionist, had been entrusted by the Government with an inquiry into the condition of the working-class. They cannot bring their commodities into relation as values, and therefore as commodities, except by comparing them with some one other commodity as the universal equivalent. Only a portion, and perhaps, not a large portion of the wealth which is annually saved in this country, is invested in our own industry." 3 The greater part of the yearly accruing surplus-product, embezzled, because abstracted without return of an equivalent, from the English labourer, is thus used as capital, not in England, but in foreign countries. This is the great secret of "systematic colonisation." By this plan, Wakefield cries in triumph, "the supply of labour must be constant and regular, be- cause, first, as no labourer would be able to procure land until he had worked for money, all immigrant labourers, working for a time for wages and in combination, would produce capital for the employment of more labourers; secondly, because every labourer who left off working for wages and became a landowner, would, by purchasing land, provide a fund for bringing fresh labour to the colony." 3 The price of the soil imposed by the State must, of course, be a "sufficient price" — i.e., so high "as to prevent the labourers from becoming independent landowners until others had followed to take their place." 4 This "sufficient price for the land" is nothing but a euphemistic circumlocution for the ran- 1 1. 28.) 2 The Manchester Spinner (Times, 26th Nov., 1862) before referred to says in relation to this subject: "It (namely, the "allowance for deterioration of machinery") is also intended to cover the loss which is constantly arising from the superseding of machines before they are worn out, by others of a new and better construction." MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 405 introduced into an industry, new methods of reproducing it more cheaply follow blow upon blow, * and so do improvements, that not only affect individual parts and details of the machine, but its entire build. As such, he shares with the miser the passion for wealth as wealth. 17.) Adam Smith, "had the atrocious wickedness to propagate atheism through the land (viz., by his "Theory of Moral Sentiments"). If the one in- crease its velocity, the other either retards its own, or altogether falls out of circulation; for the circulation can absorb only such a quantity of gold as when multiplied by the mean number of moves made by one single coin or element, is equal to the sum of the prices to be realised. 188.) 1 It will not be forgotten, that, with respect to the labour of children, &c, even the formality of a voluntary sale disappears. Does not the his- tory of the productive organs of man, of organs that are the material basis of all social organisation, deserve equal attention? I., p. Trade Ofl xaur^ay./) is literally retail trade, and Aristotle takes this kind because in it values in use predominate) does not in its nature belong to Chrematistic, for here the exchange has reference only to what is necessary to themselves (the buyer or seller)." Therefore, as he goes on to show, the original form of trade was barter, but with the extension of the latter, there arose the necessity for money. c, p. But although price, being the exponent of the magnitude of a commodity's value, is the exponent of its exchange-ratio with money, it does not follow that the exponent of this exchange-ratio is necessarily the exponent of the magnitude of the commodity's value. Adam bit the apple, and thereupon sin fell on the human race. The second volume contains simply statistics. 6d. At night, they slept in pairs in one of the stifling holes into which the bedroom was divided by partitions of board. Une foule de planteurs ont 6te mines de la sorte, d'autres ont ferme leurs ateliers pour echapper a une ruine imminente... The rent of the building we suppose to be £300 a year, or £6 a week. Thus Nature becomes one of the organs of his activity, one that he annexes to his own bodily organs, adding stature to himself in spite of the Bible. c, p. or 50 x 6 V working-hours. The labour-time socially necessary is that required to produce an article under the normal conditions of production, and with the average degree of skill and intensity prevalent at the time. The great debauchery thus produced among these "young immortals" ("Children's Employment Comm., V. the labouring man's wages will not, suitably to his low rank and station, as a labouring man, support such a family as is often the lot of many of them to have," he does not receive proper wages. Pauperism is the hospital of the active labour-army and the dead weight of the industrial reserve army. In "A Letter toA. Here the landlords, in view of the increas- ing population, have destroyed about 20 per cent, of the exist- ing nouses. 2 1 A. m., without any legal pause for meal-times. The bodily form of each of these commodities figures now as a particular equivalent form, one out of many. . In the extractive industries, mines, &c, the raw materials form no part of the capital advanced. It quenches only in a slight degree the vampire thirst for the living blood of labour. He falls into the ranks- of the supernumeraries, or is thrust down from a higher to a lower step in the scale. Every kind of capitalist production, in so far as it is not only a labour- process, but also a process of creating surplus-value, has this in common, that it is not the workman that employs the instruments of labour, but the instruments of labour that employ the work- man. Let us hear the Factory Inspectors. Let the value of the means of produc- tion used up in each article be sixpence. 897,402 yds. worth of spin- dle, &c, worn away in the process. 4,312,388 ts. xii. per hour. This question un- consciously substituted itself in Political Economy for the original one; for the search after the cost of production of labour as such turned in a circle and never left the spot. While the capitalist of the classical type brands individual consumption as a sin against his function, and as "abstinence" fiom accumulating, the modernised capitalist is capable of looking upon accumulation as "abstinence" from pleas- ure. 21, 22.) One orthodox individual, amongst Adam Smith's college friends, writes after his death: "Smith's well-placed affection for Hume ... This proposal many High- land proprietors have effected in their own country against their own coun- trymen." (George Ensor: "An Inquiry Concerning the Population of Nations." Lond., 1818, pp. Besides other causes, the division of property, within capitalist families, plays a great part in this. 191,937 . from their circumstances they are sometimes liable to be influenced by their employers . Of course he can, like his labourer, take to work himself, participate directly in the process of production, but he is then only a hybrid between capitalist and labourer, a "small mas- ter." A certain stage of capitalist production necessitates that the capitalist be able to devote the whole of the time during which he functions as a capitalist, i.e., as personified capital, to the appro- priation and therefore control of the labour of others, and to the sell- ing of the products of this labour. d. 450 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION of rest, during which there is a mere quantitative extension of the factories on the existing technical basis. Answer: "La valeur d'une chose exprimee en monnaie." And why has "le travail de la terre ... 1 SECTION 8.— REVOLUTION EFFECTED IN MANUFACTURE, HANDICRAFTS, AND DOMESTIC INDUSTRY BY MODERN INDUSTRY a. She died. This at all events is a progress as against the mercantilists who, on their side, derived the excess of the price over the cost of production of the product, from the act of exchange, from the product being sold above its value. Political Economy since the time of Adam Smith has confusedly mixed up the essential distinctions involved in these categories, with the merv formal differences, arising out of the process of circulation, of fixed and circulating capital. Within a fortnight sev- eral of these persons were attacked, and in the course of a few weeks five out of the nine had fever, and one died". 63. Sup- pose two equal quantities of socially necessary labour to be respec- tively represented by 1 quarter of wheat and £2 (nearly */ 2 oz. 1 Each individual commodity, in this connexion, is to be considered as an average sample of its class. Thus, we find the manufacture of flint glass combined with that of glass cutting and brass founding; the latter for the metal settings of va- rious articles of glass. "The command of quantity ... Jones. The progressive fall in the value of the precious metals, and there- fore of money, brought the farmers golden fruit. But, in the act of seeing, there is at all events, an actual passage of light from one thing to another, from the external object to the eye. . 2 Reports, &c, for 30th April, 1848, p. 605 . So, too, we pass over any question as to the accuracy of his figures. It is an assemblage of many properties, and may therefore be of use in various ways. Nev- ertheless, this minimum deviates from the average, although on the other hand the capitalist has to pay the average value of labour- power. 80.) 326 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION cavalry or infantry soldiers taken separately, so the sum total of the mechanical forces exerted by isolated workmen differs from the social force that is developed, when many hands take part simul- taneously in one and the same undivided operation, such as rais- ing a heavy weight, turning a winch, or removing an obstacle. Every history of religion even, that fails to take account of this material basis, is uncritical. Gilmour, spinners at Manchester, state: "In our blowing-room department we consider our expense with new machinery is fully one-third less in wages and hands... Men were busy, however, in the open shed breaking paving-stones into macadam. If under normal, i.e., average social condi- tions of production, a pounds of cotton ought to be made into b pounds of yarn by one hour's labour, then a day's labour does not count as 12 hours' labour unless 12 a pounds of cotton have been made into 12 b pounds of yarn; for in the creation of value, the time that is socially necessary alone counts. History discloses no tragedy more horrible than the gradual extinction of the English hand-loom weavers, an extinction that was spread over several decades, and finally sealed in 1838. while others, of a more practical cast, follow the trade in deer with an eye solely to profit. With the exception of the Venetian monk, Ortes, an orig- inal and clever writer, most of the population-theory teachers are Protes- tant parsons. Such insipid childishness is every 714 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION day preached to us in the defence of property. The difficul- ties in fact would be so great that they would very likely lead to the giving up of night-work altogether, and "as far as the work itself is concerned," says E. 27-32. Here, production and reproduction on a progressively increasing scale, go on their way without any intervention from that queer saint, that knight of the woeful coun- tenance, the capitalist "abstainer." 1 "The particular classes of income which yield the most abundantly to the progress of national capital, change at different stages of their prog- ress, and are, therefore, entirely different in nations occupying different positions in that progress... Gold, as gold, is exchange-value itself. Since Robinson Crusoe's experiences are a favourite theme with political economists, * let us take a look at him on his island. Vol. Go well, member of the Factory Commission of 1833, after careful investigation of the spinning trade, came to the con- clusion that, "in England wages are virtually lower to the capi- talist, though higher to the operative than on the Continent of Europe." (Ure, p. 1 F. The sum of money * which the labourer receives for his daily or weekly labour, forms the amount of his nominal wages, or of his wages estimated in value. But the past labour that is embodied in the labour-power, and the liv- ing labour that it can call into action; the daily cost of maintain- ing it, and its daily expenditure in work, are two totally differ- ent things. But, with- out labourers, their capital must have perished, or, at least, must soon have been diminished to that small amount which each individual could employ with his own hands. Polit. The former is more or less directly proportional, the latter to a certain extent inversely proportional, to the use of the machine. The total cost of administering the Acts in England, Scotland, and Ireland amounted for the year 1871-72 to no more than £25,347, inclu- sive of the law expenses incurred by prosecutions of offending masters. If we take away the useful labour expended upon them, a mate- rial substratum is always left, which is furnished by Nature without the help of man. 736 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION but for the third offence they are to be executed without mercy as felons. In proportion to the size of its population, every village has to furnish annually a definite contingent to the jobagie. The quantity of the circulating medium will increase, provided the number of commodities increase quicker, or the rapidity of circulation decrease quicker, than the prices fall. 3 "The illegal alienation of the Crown Estates, partly by sale and part- ly by gift, is a scandalous chapter in English history... . 4 Let us consider the matter a little more closely. . =3s., and in like manner 48 by -j-d. It employs two sorts of labour- ers, one grown up, tenters, the other, boys mostly from 11 to 17 years of age whose sole business is either to spread the sheets of paper under the machine, or to take from it the printed sheets. "A frightful spectacle was to be seen yesterday in one part of the metropolis. On the other hand, his school has openly proclaimed the productiveness of labour to be the originating cause of profit (read: surplus-value). 1751.) "They often work day and night, wet through to the skin, their constitution undermined and their health ruined." "You have not inquired into that subject perhaps?" "I have certainly taken note of it as I have gone along, and certainly I have seen nothing parallel to the effects of the employment of women on the pit bank. II., p. Equality, because each enters into relation with the other, as with a simple owner of commodi- ties, and they exchange equivalent for equivalent. From our present data, and within the limits of the assumptions made on p. The boys' work is of a kind for which the strength of the boys is generally ('generally,' of course not always) quite sufficient, and consequently there would be no gain in the greater strength of the men to counterbalance the loss, or it would be only in the few cases in which the metal is heavy. Polit.," Bruxelles, 1842, p. The men would not like so well not to have boys under them, as men would be less obedient. Aye! it is hot in here. The latter, as soon as they are grown up, do not care a farthing, and naturally so, for their parents, and leave them. The system of public credit, i.e., of national debts, whose origin we discover in Genoa and Venice as early as the middle ages, took possession of Europe generally during the manufac- turing period. 66. This change of form does not imply a change in the magnitude of the value. A portion at least of the society must be indefatigably employed . . The higher the rent, the greater the number that must work together to pay it. Unfortunately the acquisition of this art occurred at a time when they had nothing to cook. The labour-power is sold, al- though it is only paid for at a later period. 4 3s. His five senses also had to pay the penalty. At every new trick that the capitalist, from day to day, hit upon for keeping his machinery going 12 or 15 hours with- out increasing the number of his hands, the worker had to swallow his meals now in this fragment of time, now in that. But if we keep in mind the behaviour of surplus-value, this appearance of identity vanishes. It is only because the farmer has sold his wheat that the weaver is enabled to sell his linen, only because the weaver has sold his linen that our Hotspur is enabled to sell his Bible, and only because the latter has sold the water of everlasting life that the distiller is enabled to sell his eau-de-vie, and so on. A poor labourer, who had to go about 4 miles to his work, answered the question, whether he could not find a cot nearer: "No; they know better than to take a man in with my large family." Tinker's End, near Winslow. In 1846, the town popu- lation in France was represented by 24.42, the agricultural by 75.58; in 1861, the town by 28.86, the agricultural by 71.14 per cent. The character of creditor, or of debtor, results here from the simple circulation. Moreover, the actual movement of wages presents phenomena which seem to prove that not value of labour-power is paid, but the value of its function, of labour itself. Whether he shall find house-room on the land which he contributes to till, whether the house-room which he gets shall be human or swinish, whether he shall have the little space of garden that so vastly lessens the pressure of his poverty— all this does not depend on his willingness and ability to pay rea- sonable rent for the decent accommodation he requires, but de- pends on the use which others may see fit to make of their 'right to do as they will with their own.' However large may be a farm, there is no law that a certain proportion of labourers' dwellings (much less of decent dwellings) shall be upon it; nor does any law reserve for the labourer ever so little right in that soil to which his industry is as needful as sun and rain .... There they were thrown like refuse into garrets, holes, cel- lars and corners, in the worst back slums. If the labour be prolonged 1, 3, or 6 hours beyond A B, we have 3 other lines: Working-day I. For the rest England figures here in the foreground because she is the classic representative of capitalist produc- tion, and she alone has a continuous set of official statistics of the things we are considering. In 1814, in the same county, the weekly wage was 12s. 46.) Mr. A. If the price of labour-power fall to this minimum, it falls below its value, since under such circumstances it can be maintained and developed only in a crippled state. were flogged, fettered and tortured in the most exquisite refinement of cruelty; . And whether it had been oth- erwise possible for England, to have carried on her Woollen Manufacture to so great a perfection?" (Berkeley. . But this transmigration takes place, as it were, behind the back of the labourer. Its condi- tions of life sink below the average normal level of the working- class; this makes it at once the broad basis of special branches of capitalist exploitation. The Yankees have invented a stone-breaking machine. If therefore he thought about the matter at all, he would for- mulate the problem of the formation of capital as follows: How can we account for the origin of capital on the supposition that prices are regulated by the average price, i.e., ultimately by the value of the commodities? There is in the district almost sufficient work to give to all partial employment if fairly dis- tributed. 5, 6. c, pp. S. The law demonstrated above now, therefore, takes this form: the masses of value and of surplus-val- ue produced by different capitals — the value of labour-power be- RATE AND MASS OF SURPLUS-VALUE 307 ing given and its degree of exploitation being equal — vary di- rectly as the amounts of the variable constituents of these capi- tals , i.e. , as their constituents transformed into living labour-power. 2 On the one hand, co-operation allows of the work being car- ried on over an extended space; it is consequently imperatively called for in certain undertakings, such as draining, constructing dykes, irrigation works, and the making of canals, roads and rail- ways. 1 The exploitation of cheap and immature labour-power is carried out in a more shameless manner in modern Manufacture than in the factory proper. c, p 48. If, e.g., the daily value of labour- power is 3 shillings, the value of the product of 6 working-hours, and if the working-day is 12 hours, the price of 1 working-hour is j^ shillings =3d. 3 I.e., pp. c, pp. The substitution of one value for another, is here effected by the creation of new value. c, p. in his posthumous work, "Journals, Conversations and Essays relating to Ireland." 2 vols. At any 1 At this moment, March, 1867, the Indian and Chinese market is again overstocked by the consignments of the British cotton manufacturers. He discovered further, that the theorems of Ricardo and others, in which existing social antagonisms and contradictions are formulated, are not the ideal product of the real economic movement, but on the contra- ry, that the real antagonisms of capitalist production in England and elsewhere are the result of the theories of Ricardo and others! Finally he discovered that it is, in the last resort, commerce that destroys the inborn beauties and harmonies of the capitalist mode of production. The second period from 1815 to 1863 counts, during its 48 years, only 20 years of re- vival and prosperity against 28 of depression and stagnation. gave the impulse to these improvements. The weaver is merely a detached in- dividual, working a web when ordered of a customer, and with a loom of the rudest construction, consisting sometimes of a few branches or bars of wood, put roughly together. A and B see no difference between the two sets of transactions. 2 These manufactures, nevertheless, allowed the scattered handicrafts and domestic industries to continue to exist as a broad foundation. What we have said with reference to merchants' capital applies still more to money-lenders' capital. Since this unit is determined by the ratio daily value of labour-power .. In Hamburg it was burnt in public by order of the Senate. . c, p. Then one can without difficulty subsume everything under this category. 8, 9.) PIECE-WAGES 553 duced. In the above instances we have laid stress upon the point that the men do the same, or the same kind of work, because this, the most simple form of labour in common, plays a great part in co-operation, even in its most fully developed stage. Sixteen of these machines driven by oxen do as much work in a day as formerly 750 people did on an average. 191) is compensated by the fact that among the rest many Bibles and religious books are bound by them. But that which in the miser is a mere idiosyn- crasy, is, in the capitalist, the effect of the social mechanism, of which he is but one of the wheels. Their formulation, official recognition, and proclamation by the State, were the result of a long struggle of classes. I borrow my examples chiefly from the Free-trade period after 1848, that age of paradise, of which the commercial travellers for the great firm of Free-trade, blatant as ignorant, tell such fabulous tales. Capitalist production is not merely the pro- duction of commodities, it is essentially the production of sur- plus-value. m. Comm. If there were no divi- sion of employments, there would be no buying or selling, but there would still be profit." For Mill then, exchange, buying and selling, those general conditions of capitalist production, are but an incident, and there would always be profits even with- out the purchase and sale of labour-power! "If," he continues, "the labourers of the country collectively produce twenty per cent, more than their wages, profits will be twenty per cent., whatever prices may or may -not be." This is, on the one hand, a rare bit of tautology; for if labourers produce a surplus-value of 20% for the capitalist, his profit will be to the ABSOLUTE AND RELATIVE SURPLUS-VALUE 517 total wages of the labourers as 20 : 100. an hour. . Ch. xxi., pp. Add to this the low wages for the enormous exploitation of mature and immature labour-power. during the last half year in my district." (Re- ports, &c, for 31st October, 1857, p. The same bourgeois mind which praises division of labour in the workshop, life-long annexation of the labourer to a partial operation, and his complete subjection to capital, as being an organisation of labour that increases its productiveness — that same bourgeois mind denounces with equal vigour every conscious attempt to socially control and regulate the process of production, as an inroad upon such sacred things as the rights of property, freedom and unrestricted play for the bent of the individual capitalist. Corbon, "De l'enseignement professional," 2eme ed., p. In the second place, it is a many-coloured mosaic of disparate and independent expressions of value. II n'y a pour eux que deux sortes d'institutions, celles de l'art et celles de la nature. In every industry, each individual labourer, be he Peter or Paul, differs from the average labourer. The circumstance, however, that retorts and other vessels, are nec- essary to a chemical process, does not compel the chemist to no- tice them in the result of lys analysis. E. Still, the mass of the circulating medium in a given country never sinks below a certain minimum easily ascertained by actual experience. Everyone knows that a cotton spinner, who, reckoning the percentage on the whoie of his applied capital, employs much constant and little variable capital, does not, on account of this, pocket less profit or surplus-value than a baker, who relatively sets in motion much variable and little constant capital. 2 humain." (Boisguillebert: "Dissertation sur la nature des richesses, de I'ar- gent et des tributs." Edit. They are merely buyers or sellers. We now see that a certain minimum amount is a necessary condition for the conversion of numerous isolated and independent processes into one combined social process. they are then engaged all day long ... 702 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION Under Schedule D. By practice it is known how much is the average product of one hour. 1 Therefore, he makes up his mind to part with it for com- modities whose value in use is of service to him. In order that this alienation may be reciprocal, it is only necessary for men, by a tacit understanding, to treat each other as private owners of those alienable objects, and by impli- cation as independent individuals. CAPITALIST PRODUCTION Machinery also revolutionises out and out the contract be^ tween the labourer and the capitalist, which formally fixes their mutual relations. If, then, twenty-four hours' labour, or two working-days, are required to produce the quantity of gold represented by twelve shillings, we have here, to begin with, two days' labour already incorporated in the yarn. As an example, both of continuity of production, and of the carrying out of the automatic principle, we may take a modern paper mill. That machinery, after the horrors of the period of introduction and development have subsided, instead of dimin- ishing, in the long run increases the number of the slaves of labour! Yes, Political Economy revels in the hideous theory, hideous to every "philanthropist" who believes in the eternal Nature-ordained necessity for capitalist production, that after a period of growth and transition, even its crowning success, the factory system based on machinery, grinds down more workpeople than on its first in- troduction it throws on the streets. It is known by experience how long on the average a machine of a particular kind will last. The manufacturers elected him as their champion, not only against the newly passed Factory Act, but against the still more menacing Ten-hours' agitation. 3 "Tendency to Factory System" (1. They are, as a rule, stunted in growth, ill-shaped, and frequently ill-formed in the chest; they become prematurely old, and are certainly short-lived; they are phlegmatic and bloodless, and exhibit their debility of constitution by obstinate attacks of dyspepsia, and disorders of the liver and kidneys, and by rheu- matism. And money serves as a means of purchase by realising the price of the commodity. (David Bucha- nan: "Observations on, &.C., A. The Times of December, 1866, and January, 1867, in like manner published certain outpourings of the heart of the English mine-owner, in which the happy lot of the Belgian miners was pictured, who asked and received no more than was strictly necessary for them to live for their "masters." The Belgian la- bourers have to suffer much, but to figure in The Times as model labourers! In the beginning of February, 1867, came the answer: strike of the Belgian miners at Marchienne, put down by powder and lead. or 24 x 100 working-hours. Wade with truth remarks: "From tht statement above (i.e., with regard to the statute) it appears that in 1496 the diet was considered equivalent to one-third of the income of an arti- ficer and one-half the income of a labourer, which indicates a greater degree of independence among the working-classes than prevails at present; for the board, both of labourers and artificers, would now be reckoned at a much higher proportion of their wages." (J. We can see it daily under our very eyes. . II, pp. En quoi 1'effet d'une machine differe-t-il de celui de nouveaux habitants?" (French trans, t. 456 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION among the 2,887 cotton mills in the United Kingdom in 1861, there were many of small size. In a system of machinery, not only is the framework of the machine consumed in common by its numerous operating implements, but the prime mover, together with a part of the transmitting mechanism, is consumed in common by the numerous operative machines. That for master bakers to induce their workmen, by the fear of losing employment, to violate their religious con- victions and their better feelings, to disobey the laws of the land, and to disregard public opinion (this all refers to Sunday labour), is calculated to provoke ill-feeling between workmen and masters, . For it has not been made for the sake of being exchanged." (Aristoteles, "De Rep.," 1. 3. Have I not per- formed the labour of superintendence and of overlooking the spin- ner? Even at an advanced rent, the people who are dis- placed will hardly be able to get an accommodation so good as the meagre one they have left. He must constantly look upon his labour-power as his own property, his own com- modity, and this he can only do by placing it at the disposal of the buyer temporarily, for a definite period of time. The temperature is probably from 86° to 90° At the forges and in the rolling-mills the hands work night and day, in relays, but all the other parts of the work are day-work, i.e., from 6 a. 1, p. Let us live the life of our fathers, and let us rest from work and enjoy the gifts that the Goddess sends us." "Schonet der mahlenden Hand, o Mullerinnen. Tis the public authority upon the metal that makes it money." (N. 233.) In these stormy, go-ahead times, therefore, the tulle manufacturers soon extended the working-day, by means of double sets of hands, from the original 8 hours to 24. 3 "A negro is a negro. How completely Engels understood the nature of the capitalist mode of production is shown by the Factory Reports, Reports on Mines, &c, that have appeared since 1845, and how wonderfully he painted the circumstances in detail is seen on the most superficial comparison of his work with the official reports of the Children's Employment Commission, published 18 to 20 years later (1863-1867). In some branches of the woollen manufacture in England the employment of children has during recent years been considerably diminished, and in some cases has been entirely abolished. Econ- omy in the means of production, first systematically carried out in the factory system, and there, from the very beginning, co- incident with the most reckless squandering of labour-power, and robbery of the conditions normally requisite for labour — this economy now shows its antagonistic and murderous side more and more in a given branch of industry, the less the social pro- ductive power of labour and the technical basis for a combination of processes are developed in that branch. Whether members of his family or not, the men, boys, and girls all sleep in the cottage, which contains generally two, exception- ally 3 rooms, all on the ground floor, and badly ventilated. "The authors of this law seem to have been ashamed to state the grounds of it, for [contrary to traditional usage] it has no preamble whatever." 3 By the 16th of Charles I., ch. Fact., 31st Oct., 1865," pp. The progress consists in this alone, that the character of direct and universal exchangeability— in other words, that the universal equivalent form — has now, by social custom, be- come finally identified with the substance, gold. Twelve hours' labour are exchanged against 10, 6, &c, hours' labour. 2.) Xenophon here lays stress exclusively upon the excellence to be attained in use-value, although he well knows that the gra- dations of the division of labour depend on the extent of the market. 552 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION of wage, and are therefore paid by time. But while in Nuremberg that single artificer performed a series of perhaps 20 operations one after another, in England it was not long before there were 20 needlemakers side by side, each performing one alone of those 20 operations, and in consequence of further experience, each of those 20 operations was again split up, isolated, and made the exclusive function of a separate workman. Its function is merely to serve as the material in which the value of the first commodity is expressed. of tea =20 yards of linen, and 40 lbs. Banjuwangi, a province of Java, in 1750 numbered over 80,000 inhabitants, in 1811 only 18,000. The small, one-storied cots are often divided by partitions into two bedrooms, one bed frequently in a kitchen, 5 feet 6 inches in height. 2 coats. 2 If the manufacturing system seize upon an industry, which, previously, was carried on in connexion with others, either as a chief or as a subordinate industry, and by one producer, these industries imme- diately separate their connexion, and become independent. It cheapens and increases production in that branch which it seizes on, and at first makes no change in the mass of the means of subsistence produced in other branches. The opposite is the fact. * The refined and varied forms of the products are also due to new relations with the markets of the world, relations that are created by Modern Industry. The labour of the spinner was then viewed as specifically different from other kinds of productive labour, different on the one hand in its special aim, viz., spinning, differ- ent, on the other hand, in the special character of its operations, in the special nature of its means of production and in the special use-value of its product. 3. The real price is that which a certain quantity of work performed actu- NATIONAL DIFFERENCES OF WAGES 561 J. The official reports prove that the parents, even in the gang districts, loathe the gang-system. The weekly report of deaths by the Registrar-General dated 26th Feb., 1864, contains 5 cases of death from starvation. The principle, carried out in the factory system, of analysing the process of production into its constituent phases, and of solving the problems thus proposed by the application of mechanics, of chemistry, and of the whole range of the natural sciences, becomes the determining principle everywhere. The Catholic church was, at the time of the Reforma- tion, feudal proprietor of a great part of the English land. It is the absolute interest of every capitalist to press a given quantity of labour out of a smaller, rather than a greater number of labourers, if the cost is about the same. l The two phases of this metamorphosis are both of them distinct transactions of the weaver — selling, or the exchange of the com- modity for money; buying, or the exchange of the money for a commodity; and, the unity of the two acts, selling in order to buy. x It is owing to this that, in all metallic currencies, the names given to the standards of money or of price were originally taken from the pre-existing names of the standards of weight. Given the length of the 1 Senior, "Letters on the Factory Act." London, 1837, pp. The series itself, too, is now given, and has social recognition in the prices of actual commodities. The working population is little by little decimated as the result of the fall in wages, so that capital is again in excess relatively to them, or, as others explain it, falling wages and the correspond- ing increase in the exploitation of the labourer again accelerates accumulation, whilst, at the same time, the lower wages hold the increase of the working-class in check. If it destroys these in one form, in particular branches, at certain points, it calls them up again elsewhere, because it needs them for the prep- aration of raw material up to a certain point. . It is concentration of capitals already formed, destruction of their individual independence, expropriation of capitalist by capital- ist, transformation of many small into few large capitals. This was too difficult. + £90 var.-f- £90 surpl.; but v+s or £90 var.-f £90 surpl. . * Their second step dealt with the legal pauses for meals. 3., n. . This is merely an appli- cation of a mathematical rule, employed whenever we operate with constant and variable magnitudes, related to each other by the symbols of addition and subtraction only. Mr. Broughton Charlton, county magistrate, declared, as chairman of a meeting held at the Assembly Rooms, Nottingham, on the 14th January, 1860, "that there was an amount of priva- tion and suffering among that portion of th« population con- nected with the lace trade, unknown in other parts of the king- dom, indeed, in the civilised world... 27.) 1 "lis conviennent que plus on peut, sans prejudice, epargner de frais ou de travaux dispendieux dans la fabrication des ouvrages des artisans, plus cette epargne est profitable par la diminution des prix de ces ouvrages. for myself and tea.' The contract is binding only for the week. The productiveness of labour that serves as its foundation and starting-point, is a gift, not of Nature, but of a history embracing thousands of centuries. 4 Hence, the philosopher of the Factory, Ure, 1 On the condition of so-called domestic industries, specially valuable materials are to be found in the latest reports of the Children's Employment Commission. In the reign of James I., 1627, Roger Crocker of Front Mill, was condemned for having built 1 In his "Utopia," Thomas More says, that in England "your shepe that were wont to be so meke and tame, and so smal eaters, now, as I heare saye, be become so great devourers and so wylde that they eate up, and swallow downe, the very men themselfes." "Utopia," transl. At the same time, however, means of employment for an increased number of hands was ready in 110 new mills with 11,625 looms, 628,576 spindles and 2,695 total horse- power of steam and water (1. Dr. W. The weekly average of the liquid means of nourishment in the families varied from 3 seven ounces in the needle-women to 24-r- ounces in the stocking- makers. Trees are rare, except in sheltered places, and where not protected, are blown out of all shape. to enforce the same dinner hour for all the workpeople might occasionally subject valuable goods to the risk of danger by incomplete operations." Le platonisme ou va-t-il se nicher! 1 Xenophon says, it is not only an honour to receive food from the table of the King of Persia, but such food is much more tasty than other food. 37. A commodity can acquire a general expression of its value only by all other commodities, simultaneously with it, expressing their values in the same equivalent; and every new commodity must follow suit. 590 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION viz., that "the part of revenue, of which it is said, it has been added to capital, is consumed by productive labourers." According to this, all surplus-value that is changed into capital becomes vari- able capital. In consequence of thus finding out that I am fit for any sort of work, 1 teel less oi amollusk and more of a man." (A. The hand-mule spinners and self-actor minders put an end to the exper- iment by a petition to their employers in whicl they say, "Plainly speaking, our lives are to us a burthen; and, while we are confined to the mills nearly two days a iceek more than the other operatives of the country, we feel like helots in the land, and that we are perpetuating a system injurious to ourselves and future generations.... The weak points in the abstract mate- rialism of natural science, a materialism that excludes history and its proc- ess are at once evident from the abstract and ideological conceptions of its spokesmen, whenever they venture beyond the bounds of their own speciality. The constant generation of a relative surplus-pop- ulation keeps the law of supply and demand of labour, and there- fore keeps wages, in a rut that corresponds with the wants of capital. 17. But what we have to do with here, is not the material elements, but the value, of that capital. Once the capitalist mode of production established and become general, the difference between absolute and relative surplus-value makes itself felt, whenever there is a question of raising the rate of sur- plus-value. That, consequently, this capital falls out of employment so soon as they commence their forced holi- days, and never rests till it has found a fresh investment, where it can again be productively consumed by these same 50 men. Carlile Sons & Co., of the linen and cotton thread factory at Paisley, a company which has now existed for about a century, which was in operation in 1752, RATE AND MASS OF SURPLUS-VALUE 3H and four generations of the same family have conducted it". Horse-power is requisite wherever crooked fences and other obstruc- tions prevent' uniform action. He carried on a life-long contest, not only with the embittered manufacturers, but also with the Cabinet, to whom the number of votes given by the masters in the Lower House, was a matter of far greater importance than the number of hours worked by the "hands" in the mills. c, p. The different kinds of labour, such as tillage, cattle tending, spinning, weaving and making clothes, which result in the various products, are in them- selves, and such as they are, direct social functions, because func- tions of the family, which, just as much as a society based on the production of commodities, possesses a spontaneously devel- oped system of division of labour. If we look at the means of production, in their relation to the creation of value, and to the variation in the quantity of value, apart from anything else, they appear simply as the material in which labour-power, the value- creator, incorporates itself. of Indian corn, 6^-d.; 3d. 6d.; other work is now priced at 2s. * 1. The statutory pauses in the working-day, moreover, imply the assumption that periodical and sudden cessation of the work does no harm to the article undergoing the process of production. Lord Howard of Welden, English Plenipotentiary at Brus- sels, reports to the Foreign Office, May 12th, 1862: "M. Over- population supplies these masses. c, ed. In the manufacturing period par excellence, the capitalist mode of production had become sufficiently strong to render legal regulation of wages as impracti- cable as it was unnecessary; but the ruling classes were unwilling in case of necessity to be without the weapons of the old arsenal. Nevertheless the reader will clearly see, that where we have labour, not carried on by fits and starts, but repeated day after day with unvarying uniformity, a point must inevitably be reached, where extension of the working-day and intensity of the labour mutually exclude one another, in such a way that lengthening of the working-day becomes compatible only with a lower degree of intensity, and a higher degree of intensity, only with a shortening of the working- day. E}ut the condition of child-labour, even at the end of the 17th century, is seen from the following complaint: '"Tis not their practice (in Germany) as with us in this king- dom, to bind an apprentice for seven years; three or four is their common standard: and the reason is, because they are educated from their cradle to something of employment, which renders them the more apt and docile, and consequently the more capable of attaining to a ripeness and quicker proficiency in business. All other cir- cumstances remaining the same, the only mode by which it can reproduce its wealth, and maintain it at one level, is by replacing the means of production — i.e., the instruments of labour, the raw material, and the auxiliary substances consumed in the course of the year— by an equal quantity of the same kind of articles; these must be separated from the mass of the yearly products, and thrown afresh into the process of production. 31st Oct., 1865," p. The questions of the Committee of Emigration, and Mr Turner's answers, show how the competition of human labour is main- tained against machinery. Inland Revenue." Lond. However, we are not concerned here with the condition of the colonies. — This excellent work, that was published anonymously, is by the Rev. There is not one single atom of its value-that does not owe its existence to unpaid labour. 2 He cries out against this usurping attempt to lay taxes on the advance of industry, and declares roundly that the productiveness of labour does not concern the labourer at all. Commodities alone are money. This amount varies according to the more or less complicated character of the labour-power. A clear statement of the condition of the agricultural labour- ers in Ireland is to be found in the Reports of the Irish Poor Law Inspectors (1870). It is his deliberate act. CRISES IN THE COTTON TRADE All political economists of any standing admit that the in- troduction of new machinery has a baneful effect on the workmen in the old handicrafts and manufactures with which this ma- chinery at first competes. He kills two birds with one stone. 456. m. Lincolnshire will serve us as an example. The individual value of these articles is now below their social value; in other words, they have cost less labour- time than the great bulk of the same article produced under the average social conditions. If this labourer were in posses- sion of his own means of production, and were satisfied to live as a labourer, he need not work beyond the time necessary for the re- production of his means of subsistence, say 8 hours a day. The indefinite multiplication of the productive powers of labour can then only have for result the increase of luxury and enjoyment of the idle rich." 1 Finally Destutt de Tracy, the fish-blooded bourgeois doctri- naire, blurts out brutally: "In poor nations the people are comfor- table, in rich nations they are generally poor." 2 SECTION 5. It provides nothing more than that the children shall on certain days of the week, and for a certain number of hours (three) in each day, be inclosed within the four walls of a place called a school, and that the employer of the child shall receive weekly a certificate to that effect signed by a person designated by the subscriber as a schoolmaster or schoolmistress." 1 Previous to the passing of the amended Factory Act, 1844, it happened, not unfrequently, that the certificates of attendance at school were signed by the schoolmaster or schoolmistress with a cross, as they themselves were unable to write. The analogy appears most indisputable where there is an invisible bond uniting the various branches of trade. Every long-winded undertaking, extending over several years and demanding outlay of fixed capital, is prevented from being carried out. The product ceases to be the direct product of the individual, and becomes a social product, pro- duced in common by a collective labourer, i.e., by a combination of workmen, each of whom takes only a part, greater or less, in the manipulation of the subject of their labour. It is as if this period had found Fortunatus' purse. For children's labour only the work-time is prescribed as between 5 a. 155.) 2 "Public Health. This movement is simply indicated here, as the analysis of competition does not be- long to this part of our subject. V. The money capital formed by means of usury and commerce was prevented from turning into industrial capital, in the country by the feudal constitution, in the towns by the guild organisation. — This has now been done away with. c, p. xiii.) It is the same in glass-works. The slave-owner buys his labourer as he buys his horse. It is true, he will in one hour transfer to the yarn more value, in the shape of cotton, than he will in half an hour; but that is only because in one hour he spins up more cot- ton than in half an hour. Hence "they sometimes have long distances to go to and from work, often get wet, and suffer much hardship, not unfrequently ending in sickness, disease and want." 3 1 1. Report.," p. Between equal rights force decides. F. Insp Fact., 31st Oct., 1863," pp. Such are fish which we catch and take from their element, water, timber which we fell in the virgin forest, and ores which we extract from their veins. The different momenta of primitive accumulation distribute themselves now, more or less in chronological order, particularly over Spain, Portugal, Holland, France, and England. "The lodging which is obtained by the pitmen and other labourers connected with the collieries of North- umberland and Durham," says Dr. Julian Hunter, "is perhaps, on the whole, the worst and the dearest of which any large spe- cimens can be found in England, the similar parishes of Mon- mouthshire excepted. 84 CHAPTER II EXCHANGE It is plain that commodities cannot go to market and make exchanges of their own account. Manufactures and commerce are the two parents of our national poor." Eden, like our Scotch republican on principle, errs only in this: not the abolition of villenage, but the abolition of the property of the agricultural labourer in the soil made him a proletarian, and eventually a pauper. In one district stood four THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 691 houses, named birdcages; each had 4 rooms of the following di-» mensions in feet and inches: Kitchen: 9 ft. . The legend of theological original sin tells us certainly how man came to be condemned to eat his bread in the sweat of his brow; but the history of economic original sin reveals to us that there are people to whom this is by no means essential. Redgrave in "Rep. p. A given weight of one of the precious metals, an ounce of gold, for instance, becomes officially divided into aliquot parts, with legally bestowed names, such as pound, dollar, &c. "By this decision, the Ten Hours' Act was 1 See Reports, &c, for 30th April, 1849, p. 2 As general rule, labourers cannot co-operate without being brought together: their assemblage in one place is a necessary condition of their co-operation. were reci- pients of relief . Many of the smaller branches are not included in these figures. * Every process of production, however, requires certain simple manipulations, which every man is capable of doing. But when we come to more concrete forms, even this appearance of simplicity vanishes. 2 Second. 3 'Report of the Officer of Health of St. Martins-in-the-Fieids, 1865.' 1 - * 'Public Health, eighth report, 1866, p. If equivalents are exchanged, no surplus-value results, and if non-equivalents are exchanged, still no surplus- value. c, p. the farmer, while increasing his own gains, has prevented any accumulation on the part of his labouring dependants." 3 The part played in our days by the direct robbery from the labourer's necessary con- sumption-fund in the formation of surplus-value, and, therefore, of the accumulation-fund of capital, the so-called domestic indus- try has served to show. 429.) 6 "Currency (!) employed in producing articles ... In other words, the more use-values, e.g., stockings, a working-day yields to the stocking-manufacturer, the richer is he in stockings. t. With the equivalent form it is just the contrary. I further assumed that the operative paid by piece-work, would exert himself to the utmost consistent with the power of contin- uing at the same rate. Commodities as use-values now stand opposed to money as exchange-value. "And there is nothing wonderful in this, for as the other arts are brought to special perfection in the great towns, so the royal food is prepared in a special way. was estimated at between £60 and £70 a year. If busy, they work till 9 or 12 at night for successive nights." (Reports, &c, for 31st October, 1862, p. At length, in 1850, the privilege granted in 1844, was limited to the depart- ments of silk-twisting and silk-winding. In the summer we get a few potatoes, planting a small patch ourselves; and when they are done we get back to stirabout. A certain accumulation of capital, in the hands of individual producers of commodities, forms therefore the necessary prelim- inary of the specifically capitalistic mode of production. 696 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION It exists for the enrichment of the large farmers, 1 and indirectly of the landlords. The exchange of equivalents, the original operation with which we start- ed, has now become turned round in such a way that there is only an apparent exchange. However rapid reproduction may be, it takes, at all events, the space of a gener- ation to replace the loss of adult labour. c, pp. It is well known that Great Britain, apart from its own immense store of rags, is the emporium for the rag trade of the whole world. 58 and 70.) Bailey criticises the dogma mainly from the point of view of the process of circulation. of cotton were concentrated in the 13-y lbs. The seller gets it from the buyer and pays it away to another seller. 2 "Its (labour's) natural price ... Come damned earth, Thou common whore of mankind." (Shakespeare: Timon of Athens.) 3 "Oo5sv ydp avOpcmroiaiv otv ap*ft>po<; Kaxov voptiajia tfUaate- touto xai n6Xgt<; IIopQel, x68' avopa<; eSavtaTTjaiv 66[ia>v. 1832, pp. Of course the pretensions of capital in embryo— when, beginning to grow, it secures the right of absorbing a quantum sufficit of surplus-labour, not merely by the force of economic relations, but by the help of the State— appear very modest when put face to face with the concessions that, growling and struggling, it has to make in its adult condition. This machine, which shook Europe to its foundations, was in fact the precursor of the mule and the power-loom, and of the industrial revolution of the 18th century. But the chief sources of their supply are Germany, France, Russia, Italy, Egypt, Turkey, Bel- gium, and Holland. But these farmers had rights of jurisdiction in some degree over the dwellers on the soil; there were four grades. With an increasing daily or weekly wage the price of labour may remain nominally constant, and yet may fall below its normal level. 110. There was now "more capi- tal" laid out in agriculture than before, and in a more productive form. it was shown, how the development of the produc- tiveness of social labour pre-supposes co-operation on a large scale; how it is only upon this supposition that division and combination of labour can be organised, and the means of production econo- mised by concentration on a vast scale; how instruments of labour which, from their very nature, are only fit for use in common, such as a system of machinery, can be called into being; how huge natural forces can be pressed into the service of production; and how the transformation can be effected of the process of production 624 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION into a technological application of science. His employment should be a general atten- tion to the whole: his thresher must be watched, or he will soon lose his wages in corn not threshed out; his mowers, reapers, &c, must be looked after; he must constantly go round his fences; he must see there is no neglect; which would be the case if he was confined to any one spot." ("An Inquiry into the Connexion between the Present Price of Provisions and the Size of Farms, &c. This cir- cumstance so completely rivets his influence in the open villages 1 "Child. This gives rise partly to state subsidies to private persons, as in France in the time of Colbert, and as in many German states up to our own epoch; partly to the formation of societies with legal mo- nopoly for the exploitation of certain branches of industry and com- merce, the fore-runners of our modern joint-stock companies. he lives upon his coarse fare, and works hard, wherein his position is subordinate to that of the English operative." ("Rep. In 1832, the spinner put up on each mule 2,200 stretches, making a total of 4,400. It follows necessarily then, that he who does the simplest kind of work, undoubtedly does it better than anyone else. See Roscher's "Die Grundlagen der Natio- nalokonomie, Dritte Auflage," 1858. 658 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION of misery are exploited by house speculators with more profit or less cost than ever were the mines of Potosi. 118, 119, 120, 126, sqq. * The weight of metal in the silver and copper tokens is arbi- trarily fixed by law. whereas hunger is not only a peaceable, silent, unremitted pres- sure, but as the most natural motive to industry and labour, it calls forth the most powerful exertions." Everything therefore depends upon making hunger permanent among the working- class, and for this, according to Townsend, the principle of popu- lation, especially active among the poor, provides. Blanqui." M. An example: The shirt factory of Messrs. (1.) Diminishing productiveness of labour with a simultaneons lengthening of the working-day In speaking of diminishing productiveness of labour, we here refer to diminution in those industries whose products determine the value of labour-power; such a diminution, for example, as results from decreasing fertility of the soil, and from the corre- sponding dearness of its products. Why does gold take the form of money face to face with the linen? 1 2 Salt Pie Street (bottom) . 2 "A Discourse on the necessity of encouraging Mechanick Industry," London, 1690, p. And yet decks himself out, and would be thought pi- ous, so that people may not see where the oxen have gone, that he drags back- wards into his den. This mass must, therefore, be capable of expansion and contrac- tion. 38 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION but as exchange-values they are merely different quantities, and consequently do not contain an atom of use-value. The work of these 200 people for half an hour a day is equal to one person's work for 50 hours, or 5 / 6 of one person's labour in a week, and is a positive gain to the employ- er." ("Reports of Insp. * The law that regulates the division of labour in the community acts with the irresistible authority of a law of Nature, at the same time that each individual artificer, the smith, the carpenter, and so on, conducts in his workshop all the operations of his handicraft in the traditional way, but inde- pendently, and without recognising any authority over him. "Several successive acts of exchange have only made the last represent the first" (Sismondi, "Nouveaux Principes, etc.," p. The changed form of the commodity is thus pre- vented from functioning as its unconditionally alienable form, or as its merely transient money-form. 217. they are reactionary, for they try to roll back the wheel of history. and affords an example dangerous to reli- gion, morality, and social order. The latter, combined with the more intense strain on the workman, have had the effect, that at least as much is produced in the shortened (by two hours or one- sixth) working-day as was previously produced during the long- er one." 1 One fact is sufficient to show how greatly the wealth of the manufacturers increased along with the more intense exploita- tion of labour-power. (Addition to 3rd Edi- tion.) For the explanation of this statement, which is not very clear to non- chemists, we remark that the author speaks here of the homologous series of carbon compounds, first so named by G. 22, p. In this way, the character that his own labour possesses of being socially useful takes the form of the condition, that the product must be not only useful, but useful for others, and the social character that his particular labour has of being the equal of all other particular 74 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION kinds of labour, takes the form that all the physically different articles that are the products of labour, have one common quality, viz., that of having value. Under this head the following categories show the greatest increase: of 1864 over that increase of 1853 per year Houses, 38.60% 3.50% Quarries, 84.76o/ 7.70% Mines, 68.85% 6.26% Ironworks, 39.92% 3.63% Fisheries, 57.37% 5.21% Gasworks, 125.02% H.45% Railways, 83.29% 7.57%* If we compare the years from 1853 to 1864 in three sets of four consecutive years each, the rate of augmentation of the in- come increases constantly. The owner makes up for this lack in the commodity of a sense of the concrete, by his own five and more senses. s. Apart from their wording, which makes it easy for the cap- italist to evade them, the sanitary clauses are extremely mea- gre, and, in fact, limited to provisions for whitewashing the walls, for insuring cleanliness in some other matters, for ventilation, and for protection against dangerous machinery.  52.) 2 See "Theorien von der Masseinheit des Geldes" in "Zur Kntik der Pol. What, however, does belong to us as objects, is our value. 100.) Lawyers started long before economists the idea that money is a mere symbol, and that the value of the precious metals is purely imagi- nary. First, those able to work. What remains, is the only value that has, in the process of producing the commodity, been actually created. The same labour extracts from rich mines more metal than from poor mines. . Some fled to the mountains and neighbouring islands. GENESIS OP THE INDUSTRIAL CAPITALIST 751 wealth of the country is a complete change in the right of property, and by what law, or series of laws, was it effected?" 1 The author should have remembered that revolutions are not made by laws. c, pp. It realises itself now in profit for a few capitalists. In this case it is no longer necessary to bear in mind that he in his turn will become a seller. In the sphere of agriculture, modern industry has a more revolutionary effect than elsewhere, for this reason, that it anni- hilates the peasant, that bulwark of the old society, and replaces him by the wage-labourer. Oek.," p. LEGISLATION AGAINST THE EXPROPRIATED 737 Paris. It is not the pos- session of land, or of money, but the command of labour which distinguishes the opulent from the labouring part of the commu- nity . of yarn, in which the whole of the value newly created during the process, is condensed, one half represents the equivalent for the value of the labour consumed, or the 3s. This is to some extent the case in new Ameri- can settlements, where a passion for owning land prevents the existence of a class of labourers for hire." 1 So long, therefore, as the labourer can accumulate for himself — and this he can do so long as he remains possessor of his means of production- capitalist accumulation and the capitalistic mode of production are impossible. It is self-evident, that in proportion as the use of machinery spreads, and the experience of a special class of workmen habitu- ated to machinery accumulates, the rapidity and intensity of labour increase as a natural consequence. Torrens:" Effectual demand consists in the power and inclination (!), on the part of consumers, to give for commodities, either by immediate or circuitous barter, some greater portion of ... means of production, are now consumed in common. 160 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION frequently used by modern economists, more especially when the point is to show, that the exchange of commodities in its developed form, commerce, is productive of surplus-value. A horse, in like manner, can only work from day to day, 8 hours. 16. c, pp. 132.) These open villages form, in fact, the "penal settlements" of the English agricultural proletariat. 2 "f found that men who had been getting 10s. "The cotton trade has existed for ninety years. One woman or one girl superintends four such machines, and so pro- duces near upor 600,000 needles in a day, and upwards of 3,000,000 in a week. E.\ 42 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION Coats are not exchanged for coats, one use-value is not exchanged for another of the same kind. 96. . In so far as such a manufacture, when first started, combines scattered handicrafts, it lessens the space by which the various phases of production are separated from each other. 2d.; the total yearly expenditure of a family of 5 per- sons, £54 18s. He starts from the for- mer. He says, industrial capitalists make profits because "they all sell for more than it has cost to produce. So long as handicraft and manufacture form the general groundwork of social production, the subjection of the producer to one branch exclusively, the breaking up of the multifariousness of his employment, 3 is a necessary step in the development. (If the master break the contract, he can be pro- ceeded against only in a civil action, and risks nothing but money damages.) After the workman has served his two months, the master invites him to re- turn to the works, pursuant to the contract. If we deduct from this population all who are too old or too young for work, all unproductive women, young persons and children, the "ideological" classes, such as gov- ernment officials, priests, lawyers, soldiers, &c; further, all who have no occupation but to consume the labour of others in the form of rent, interest, &c; and, lastly, paupers, vagabonds, and criminals, there remain in round numbers eight millions of the two sexes of every age, including in that number every capi- talist who is in any way engaged in industry, commerce, or finance. The antagonistic character of capitalist accumulation, and therefore of the capital- istic relations of property generally, x is here so evident, that even the official English reports on this subject teem with heterodox onslaughts on "property and its rights." With the development of industry, with the accumulation of capital, with the growth and "improvement" of towns, the evil makes such progress that the mere fear of contagious diseases which do not spare even "respectability," brought into existence from 1847 to 1864 no less than 10 Acts of Parliament on sanitation, and that the fright- ened bourgeois in some towns, as Liverpool, Glasgow, &c, took strenuous measures through their municipalities. The pack- ing together of knots of men in scattered little villages and small country towns corresponds to the forcible draining of men from the surface of the land. — Ed. 2 The Factory Acts Extension Act was passed on August 12, 1867. 116.) 2 G. "Violent revulsions of this nature," he says, "display short- sighted man in the contemptible character of a self-tormentor." A few pages before he states the contrary. These characters of seller and buyer are therefore not permanent, but attach themselves in turns to the various persons engaged in the circulation of commodities. The money functions now, first as a measure of value in the determi- nation of the price of the commodity sold; the price fixed by the contract measures the obligation of the debtor, or the sum of money that he has to pay at a fixed date. The flour is given in quarters of corn. On the other hand, implements, in regard to which man has always acted as a simple motive power, as, for instance, 1 It is only during the last 15 years (i.e., since about 1850), that a constantly increasing portion of these machine tools have been made in England by machinery, and that not by the same manufacturers who make the machines. The pro- portions in which they are exchangeable, whatever those propor- tions may be, can always be represented by an equation in which a given quantity of corn is equated to some quantity of iron: e.g., 1 quarter corn=xcwt. But alongside of this form we find another specifi- cally different form: M— C— M, the transformation of money into commodities, and the change of commodities back again into money; or buying in order to sell. II, p. Its transactions during the year 1856, extending to many millions of pounds sterling, are here reduced to the scale of one million. Sicilien "Historische Bibliothek," book III, 12-14. The miners demand almost unanimously an act of Parliament prohibiting the employment in mines of children under 14. It will be remembered that if through the intro- duction of new, or the extension of old, machinery, a portion of variable capital is transformed into constant, the economic apolo- gist interprets this operation which "fixes" capital and by that very act sets labourers "free," in exactly the opposite way, pretend- ing that it sets free capital for the labourers. In Eng- land at the end of the 17th century, they arrive at a systematical combination, embracing the colonies, the national debt, the mod- ern mode of taxation, and the protectionist system. Econ^ &c.,"2nd Ed., Glasgow, 1832, pp. In short, it is a means for- producing surplus-value. If this state of things lasts for some time, and extends, there follows a discharge of workmen employed in the production of these commodities. Ed. Leipz^ 1854, p. 3 In the 18th century the hunted-out Gaels were for- bidden to emigrate from the country, with a view to driving them by force to Glasgow and other manufacturing towns. — F. The varied, appar- ently unconnected, and petrified forms of the industrial proc- esses now resolved themselves into so many conscious and sys- tematic applications of natural science to the attainment of given useful effects. High, Is. 3d. 15. 1 In comparison with a handi- craft, productive power is gained, and this gain is owing to the general co-operative character of manufacture. . This is the constant part of his capital. Whether the motive pow- er is derived from man, or from some other machine, makes no difference in this respect. 250, § 190. c, pp. Every one knows that there are no real forests in England. The introduction of power-looms into England probably reduced by one-half the labour required to weave a given quantity of yarn into cloth. In Answer to Mr. Locke's Con- siderations," «&c, London, 1696, pp. Spinning and weaving were, during the manufacturing period, split up into new species, and the implements were modified and improved; but the labour itself was in no way divided, and it retained its handicraft character. CM „h? While prices remain constant, the quantity of the circulat- ing medium may increase owing to the number of circulating commodities increasing, or to the velocity of currency decreas- ing, or to a combination of the two. viii., 1855. 543. On looking around us we cannot but see, that they are unable to find their level for a long time; and that when they do find it, the level is always lower than at the commencement of the process." ("An Inquiry into those Principles Respecting the Nature of Demand," &c. See also "Agricultural Labourers (Ireland). (G. If the daily value of one la- bour-power =3s., then a capital of 300s. Hence arises one of the causes of the great size of manufacturing establishments." (C. Baker, the Inspector of Factories, says, "I have myself had lately to direct prosecutions against one cotton mill occupier for having in these pinching 426 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION its list of the killed and wounded in the industrial battle. 13.) "The employer will be always THE CONCEPT OF RELATIVE SURPLUS-VALUE 321 produces, say 10 times as many commodities as before, and thus spends one-tenth as much labour-time on each, by no means pre- vents him from continuing to work 12 hours as before, nor from pro- ducing in those 12 hours 1,200 articles instead of 120. It is, of course, just as absurd to hold the Teutonic-Chris- tian form of the family to be absolute and final as it would be to apply that character to the ancient Roman, the ancient Greek, or the Eastern forms which, moreover, taken together form a series in historical development. Under these circumstances a compromise between masters and men was effected that received the seal of Parliament in the additional Factory Act of August 5th, 1850. See No. 14, and No. 265, I. 297.) This kind of examination becomes at last too much even for the chairman of the committee, and he interrupts with the observation: "You want a class of men who would look into ail the details of the mine, and would go into all the holes and corners, and go into the real facts . In order to effect a fall in the value of labour-power, the increase in the productiveness of labour must seize upon those branches of industry, whose products determine the value of labour-power, and consequently either belong to the class of customary means of subsistence, or are capable of supplying the place of those means. The difficulty lies, not in comprehending that money is a commodity, but in discovering how, why, and by what means a commodity becomes money. Began there, too, at 3 on Saturday morning — always did, but was very gain [near] home, and could sleep at home. 384 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION the cotton fibre; it was only by means of this invention, that the production of cotton became possible on the enormous scale at present required. The following list gives the wages paid in three villages in the neighbourhood of Blanford, Wim- bourne, and Poole. During the 8 years immediately pre- ceding 1864, the excess of imports over exports of the precious metals amount- ed to £109,652,917. of yarn, one-sixth of the gross product, with a value of £2,000 which will be realised by a sale. The inhabitants give themselves no trouble about the breaking up and division of kingdoms; while the village remains entire, they care not to what power it is transferred, or to what sovereign it devolves; its internal economy remains unchanged." (Th. Stamford Raffles, late Lieut. 2 An exception to this law holds good whenever the decomposition of the labour-process begets new and comprehensive functions, that either had no place at all, or only a very modest one, in handicrafts. It never adds more value than it loses, on an average, by wear and tear. Landlord and tenant . See "Hygiene phy- sique et morale de l'ouvrier dans les grandes villes en general et dans la ville de Lyon en particulier. 269.) 214 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION imaginable. It requires but little racking of brains to comprehend that if one quarter of wheat costs £2, 100 quarters will cost £200, 200 quarters £400, and so on, that consequently the quantity of money that changes place with the wheat, when sold, must increase with the quantity of that wheat. Eden, 1. The expression of the value of commodity A in terms of any other commodity B, merely distinguishes the value from the use-value of A, and therefore places A merely in a relation of exchange with a single different commodity, B; but it is still far from expressing A's qualitative equality, and quantitative proportionality, to all commodities. an enormous amount of time is lost . In so far as exchange is a process, by which commodities are transferred from hands in which they are non-use-values, to hands in which they become use-values, it is a social circulation of matter. But no one is forthwith bound to purchase, because he has just sold. As long as the labour spent on a machine, and consequently the portion of its value added to the product, remains smaller than the value added by the workman to the product with his tool, there is always a difference of labour saved in favour of the machine. MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 465 most ample material bearing on it is to be found in the Public Health Reports IV. 1845, p. of Fact, for 31st Oct., 1862," pp. xii. Hence if the number of moves made by the separate pieces increase, the total number of those pieces in cir- culation diminishes. But it is also only from then onwards that commodity production is generalised and becomes the typical form of production; it is only from then onwards that, from the first, every product is produced for sale and all wealth produced goes through the sphere of cir- culation. 31 houses visited, 8 with only one bedroom. 91.) 3 A boorishly clumsy form of this bondage exists in the county of Durham. c, p. The work is hard and the sum- mer heat increases the exhaustion. Obsequium ventris istis (the labourers) perniciosius est. The leadership of industry is an attribute of capital, just as in feudal times the functions of general and judge, were attributes of landed property. . 125, 126.) 1 Japan, with its purely feudal organisation of landed property and its developed petite culture, gives a much truer picture of the European middle ages than all our history books, dictated as these are, for the most part, by bourgeois prejudices. * Of these facts, Dr. Simon in his General Health Report says: 'That cases are innumerable in which defective diet is the cause or the aggravator of disease, can be affirmed by any one who is conversant with poor law medi- cal practice, or with the wards and out-patient rooms of hospi- tals. 1 Its total emigration from May, 1851, to July, 1865, numbered 1,591,487: the emigra- tion during the years 1861-1865 was more than half-a-million. of tea 40 lbs. Their change of value is seen as soon as they are compared with a third commodity, whose value has remained constant. 172.) This circumstance favourably distinguishes Malthus from the other Protestant parsons, who have shuffled off the com- mand enjoining celibacy of the priesthood and have taken, "Be fruitful and multiply," as their special Biblical mission in such a degree that they gen- erally contribute to the increase of population to a really unbecoming extent, whilst they preach at the same time to the labourers the "principle of popu- lation." It is characteristic that the economic fall of man, the Adam's ap- ple, the urgent appetite, "the checks which tend to blunt the shafts of Cupid," as Parson Townsend waggishly puts it, that this delicate question was and is monopolised by the Reverends of Protestant Theology, or rather of the Protestant Church. The result is the reproduction of v plus an increment of v. Altogether, Marx's book is not so much an investigation into capital, as a polemic against the present form of capital, a form which he confounds with the concept itself of capital."* ("Briefe, &c, von Dr. Rodbertus-Jagetzow, herausgg. The material variety of these commodities is the ma- terial incentive to the act of exchange, and makes buyers and sellers mutually dependent, because none of them possesses the object of his own wants, and each holds in his hand the object of another's wants. In this price the labour required for the production of the cotton is al- ready expressed in terms of the average labour of society. It is apt to be forgotten that the magnitudes of different things can be com- pared quantitatively, only when those magnitudes are expressed in terms of the same unit. 253.) 2 "Mr. E., a manufacturer. If instead of "gang" it were called "the Agricultural Juvenile Industrial Self-supporting Association," everything would be all right. Later, a treddle spinning- wheel with two spindles was invented, but adepts in spinning, who could spin two threads at once, were almost as scarce as two- leaded men. In this case, as in all cases of measuring quantities of the same denomination, the establishment of an unvarying unit of measure is all-important. Piece-wage is, there- fore, only a modified form of time-wage. P., and less than 20 H. Such co-operation is distinguished from capitalistic co-operation by both of the above characteristics. B or=v Com. la troisieme division d'industrie, celle enfin qu'on devrait qualifier de division de la besogne ou de travail proprement dit, est celle qui s'etablit dans les arts et les metiers separes ... The tailor, the locksmith, and the oth- er artificers, being now exclusively occupied in carriage-making, each gradually loses, through want of practice, the ability to carry on, to its full extent, his old handicraft. 14, 15.) 512 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION the flesh of another. which was made of 5-t- lbs. Dr. Aikin (1795) 1. 109. (J. But in order to be able to buy those commodities, he must find them ready in the market. The definition of constant capital given above by no means excludes the possibility of a change of value in its elements. Pen- till, in the same parish: a cot let at Is. 3d. . That is why you bought it. 1 11 persons Marshall Street, No. 28 . Apart from all the other circumstances discussed above, it lowered wages. We therefore find them substantially, but not consciously, worked out in classical Political Economy. c, Vol I., Book II., Ch. I., p. Political Economy has indeed analysed, however incom- pletely, 1 value and its magnitude, and has discovered what lies beneath these forms. As our people are famed for bravery in war, do we not say that it is owing to good English roast beef and pudding in their bellies, as well as their constitutional spirit of liberty? The value of the yarn is 30 shillings. This is seen, not only locally at the points where the efflux of men to towns, mines, railroad-making, &c, is most marked. 163.) 4 "The only productive consumption, properly so called, is the con- sumption or destruction of wealth" (he alludes to the means of production) "by capitalists with a view to reproduction.... 1860.-59,166,616 lbs. 12, 13. We have learnt to know its chief form under the rubric of "domestic industry." It recruits itself constantly from the supernumerary forces of modern indus- try and agriculture, and specially from those decaying branches of industry where handicraft is yielding to manufacture, manu- facture to machinery. He can strike so many blows per day, walk so many steps, breathe so many breaths, produce so much work, and live an aver- age, say of fifty years; he is made to strike so many more blows, to walk so many more steps, to breathe so many more breaths per day, and to increase altogether a fourth of his life. Again, if the technical conditions of the spinning process re- main unchanged, and no change of value takes place in the means of production, the spinner continues to consume in equal work- ing-times equal quantities of raw material, and equal quanti- ties of machinery of unvarying value. Nay, more: instead of simply representing the relations of commodities, it enters now, so to say, into private relations with itself. . Longe's Report. In order that the family may live, four people must now, not only labour, but expend surplus- labour for the capitalist. 903.) 8 Condillac: "Le Commerce et le Gouvernement" (1776). 3 Still, this was not enough. 4 "Si le manouvrier libre prend un instant de repos, Peconomie sordide qui le suit des yeux avec inquietude, pretend qu'il la vole." N. I found the man with his family sitting in a little back room. That work beyond 12 hours has a tendency to under- mine the health of the working-man, and so leads to premature old age and death, to the great injury of families of working-men, thus deprived of the care and support of the head of the family when most required."* 1 Report oi Committee on the Baking Trade in Ireland for 1861. M. If the conditions of production, in other words, if the productive power of labour remain constant, the same amount of social labour-time must, both before and after the change in price, be expended in the reproduction of a quarter of wheat. But what is the cost of production — of the labourer, i.e., the cost of producing or reproducing the labourer himself? . 2 1. Pol." trad. "The whole employment is at this time in a state of transition, and is undergoing the same change as that effected in the lace trade, weaving, &c." (i. ! Each use-value disappears, but only to re-appear under a new form in a new use-value. some of them have been out of work for weeks just in consequence of the bad state of the ventilation where there is not explosive gas . Insp. 35 and pp. The reproduction of a mass of labour-power, which must incessantly re-incorporate itself with capital for that capital's self-expansion; which cannot get free from capital, and 614 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION whose enslavement to capital is only concealed by the variety of individual capitalists to whom it sells itself, this reproduction of labour-power forms, in fact, an essential of the reproduction of capital itself. The value- form of commodities, money, is therefore now the end and aim of a sale, and that owing to a social necessity springing out of the process of circulation itself. 8 A new and internation- al division of labour, a division suited to the requirements of the chief centres of modern industry springs up, and converts one part of the globe into a chiefly agricultural field of production, for sup- plying the other part which remains a chiefly industrial field. Torrens: "An Essay on the Production of Wealth," &c, pp. The spirit of capitalist produc- tion stands out clearly in the ludicrous wording of the so-called education clauses in the Factory Acts, in the absence of an admin- istrative machinery, an absence that again makes the compul- sion illusory, in the opposition of the manufacturers themselves to these education clauses, and in the tricks and dodges they put in practice for evading them. On the one hand, the fluctuation up and down of the number of paupers, reflects the periodic changes of the industrial cycle. Every such expression tells us, that what appears in the use-values, coat, corn, &c, is the value of the linen. And when at last it becomes quite uninhabitable— unin- habitable even to the humblest standard of serfdom— it will be but one more destroyed cottage, and future poor-rates will be somewhat lightened. The average of their individual compositions gives us the composition of the total capital in this branch of production. The total value then of the 20 lbs. Paris, 1826, t. m., and get three hours of it (for meals and rest). 124. The essence of a free colony, on the contrary, consists in this — that the bulk of the soil is still public property, and every settler on it therefore can turn part of it into his private property and individual means of production, without hindering the later set- tlers in the same operation. 1 And, indeed, experience shows to the intelligent observer with what swiftness and grip the capitalist mode of production, dating, historically speaking, only from yesterday, has seized the vital power of the people by the very root — shows how the degeneration of the industrial population is only retarded by the constant absorption of primitive and physically uncorrupted elements from the country— shows how even the country labourers, in spite of fresh air and the princi- ple of natural selection, that works so powerfully amongst them, and only permits the survival of the strongest, are already be- ginning to die off. The cash is given in the shop" {i.e., the Tommy shop which belongs to the master), "the men take it on one side and lay it out on the other." ("Children's Employment Commission, III. . I have not one cottage on my farm. CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO CAPITAL 585 The fact that this particular commodity, labour-power, pos- sesses the peculiar use-value of supplying labour, and therefore of creating value, cannot affect the general law of commodity produc- tion. of Fact, for 1844 and the quarter ending 30th April, 1845, pp. These three factors, however, state of prices, quantity of circulating commodities, and velocity of money-currency, are all variable. 2 As soon as this primitive dominion of the new mode of production was con- quered, it was found that, in the meantime, not only had many other branches of production been made to adopt the same factory system, but that manufactures with more or less obsolete methods, such as potteries, glass-making, &c, that old-fashioned handicrafts, like baking, and, finally, even that the so-called domestic indus- 1 "The conduct of each of these classes (capitalists and workmen) has been the result of the relative situation in which they have been placed." (Reports, &c, for 31st October, 1848, p. 171 . This mechanical appliance replaces, not some particular tool, but the hand itself, which produces a given form by holding and guiding the cutting tool along the iron or other material operated upon. Here the par- ticular and natural form of labour, and not, as in a society based on production of commodities, its general abstract form is the immediate social form of labour. NUMBER OF FACTORIES. About 1750, the yeomanry had disappeared, * and so had, in the last decade of the 18th century, the last trace of the common land of the agricultural labourer. We know that the value of each commodity is determined by the quantity of labour expended on and materialised in it, by the working-time necessary, under given social conditions, for its production. xvii. Three days' surplus-labour in the week remain three days that yield no equivalent to the labourer himself, wheth- ness. G. It was not less active in the old-fashioned bakeries than in the modern cotton factories. In the corvee, the labour of the worker for himself, and his compulsory labour for his lord, differ in space and time in the clearest possible way. c. At English instigation and for English pay they were tomahawked by red-skins. PRODUCTIVENESS OF LABOUR CONSTANT. 2 On the other hand, the attempt to explain such expressions as merely poetic license only shows the impotence of the analysis. A statute of Elizabeth of 1562 leaves the length of the work- ing-day for all labourers "hired for daily or weekly wage" un- touched, but aims at limiting the intervals to 2y hours in the summer, or to 2 in the winter. 6 8 7 1/-.1/6, 10 1 6 8 6 1 0>/ 4 6 8 7 V-,1/6, 7 1 3 1 /, 5 8V, 8V, 8 10 7 — 7 1 3V, 5 8\/ 2 7 4 6 7 — 7 1 6«/ 2 5 5 l / 2 11 3 5 7 — 7 1 6V 2 5 5V. The number of the labourers simultaneously employed depends, on its side, on the ratio of the variable to the constant capital. A mer- 1 Lieut. Sometimes I come at 4. He has no intention of being robbed. m. 909.) 112 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION value, a crystal into which the commodity eagerly solidifies, and in the second, dissolves into the mere transient equivalent- form destined to be replaced by a use-value. If, on the other hand, we say, that in England the power-loom threw 800,000 weavers on the streets, we do not refer to existing machinery, that would have to be re- placed by a definite number of workpeople, but to a number of weavers in existence who were actually replaced or displaced by the looms. The only thing that interests us is the secret discov- ered in the new world by the Political Economy of the old world, and proclaimed on the house-tops: that the capitalist mode of production and accumulation, and therefore capitalist private property, have for their fundamental condition the annihilation of self-earned private property; in other words, the expropriation of the labourer. F. But the use of furnaces would involve a further loss in our case. The comprehension of this change of form is, as a rule, very imperfect. xiii. For a particular form of its own use-value. 3 The reason of this is that man is, if not as Aris- totle contends, a political, 4 at all events a social animal. . Along with the extension of circulation, increases the power of money, that absolutely social form of wealth ever ready for use. He was, there- fore, in 1845, a favourite subject in the revelations of the Morn- ing Chronicle on the condition of the agricultural labourers. of Fact, for 31st October, 1858/' pp. In the centres of modern industry— factories, manufactures, ironworks, mines, &c. 4 Thus e.g., in the earthenware trade, Messrs. ... THE WORKING-DAY 251 bread. On the other, the official statistics become more and more misleading as to the actual extent of pau- perism in proportion as, with the accumulation of capital, the class-struggle, and, therefore, the class-consciousness of the working-men, develop. The action of labour-power, therefore, not only reproduces its own value, but produces value over and above it. But, on the whole, machinery played that subordi- nate part which Adam Smith assigns to it in comparison with division of labour. In all cases the power was hired at so much per loom. As co-operation extends its scale, this despotism takes forms peculiar to itself. of linen =1 coat, already pro- pounds the riddle of the equivalent form for our solution. 1 Just as every qualitative difference between commodities is ex- tinguished in money, so money, on its side, like the radical leveller that it is, does away with all distinctions. But this is not evident on the surface. But the reader may compare the "highly respectable" Cyclopaedia of Agriculture of J. Paris, 1817, t. These changes are, however, continually interrupted by periods 1 See "Reports, &c, 31 Oct., 1856," p. The result of all experience and history with regard to this question is simply that, where two commodities perform by law the functions of a measure of value, in practice one alone maintains that position." (Karl Marx, 1. Les des sont pipes. "Reports of Insp. For this the mechanism of capitalist production provides beforehand, by converting the working-class into a class dependent on wages, a class whose ordinary wages suffice, not only for its maintenance, but for its increase. The smaller and medium farmers— I reckon among these all who Q do not cultivate more than 100 acres — still make up about TTjths of the whole number. No one can sell unless some one else purchases. ... 80.) The French Twelve Hours' Bill of September 5th, 1850, a bourgeois edition of the decree of the Provisional Government of March 2nd, 1848, holds in all workshops without exceptions. c, p. . Enough, that the world still jogs on, solely through the self- chastisement of this modern penitent of Vishnu, the capitalist. a quarter, and the average yield per acre to be 22 bushels. Capitalist production complete- ly tears asunder the old bond of union which held together agri- culture and manufacture in their infancy. It falls relatively to the magni- tude of the total capital, and at an accelerated rate, as this magnitude increases. 38. As soon as capitalist production is once on its own legs, it not only maintains this separation, but reproduces it on a continually extending scale. SECTION 2.— THE VALUE TRANSFERRED BY MACHINERY TO THE PRODUCT We saw that the productive forces resulting from co-opera- tion and division of labour cost capital nothing. He says:] "The demand for labour depends on the increase of circulating, and not of fixed capital. XIX.) More naive is Petty, who says, it replaces "Polygamy." The above point of view is, at the most, admissible only for some parts of the United States. l'etablissement du prix des choses depend ton jours fondamentalement de la raison du total des choses au total des signes." (Mon- tesquieu, I. In the markets of the world a double measure of value holds sway, gold and silver. II. But the labourer is not paid until after he has expended his labour-power, and realised in commodities not only its value, but surplus-value. — the labourers are sometimes repelled, sometimes attracted again in greater masses, the number of those employed increasing on the whole, although in a constantly de- creasing proportion to the scale of production. The secret of their inefficiency Bacon, without knowing it, reveals to us. The number of power-looms decreased by 20,663; but since their product increased in the same period, an improved loom must have yielded more than an old one. c, pp. Many of these colossal hammers strike seventy times in a minute, and Ryder's patent machine for forging spindles with small hammers gives as many as 700 strokes per minute. For, in the first place, however varied the useful kinds of labour, or productive activities, may be, it is a physiological fact, that they are func- tions of the human organism, and that each such function, what- ever may be its nature or form, is essentially the expenditure of human brain, nerves, muscles, &c. The German colonists in Brandenburg, Pomerania, Silesia, and Eastern Prussia, were even legally acknowledged as free men. This sphere that we are deserting, within whose boundaries the sale and purchase of labour-power goes on, is in fact a very Eden of the innate rights of man. 80, 203, 204). 206. By the 12 working-hours contained in a working-day of 12 hours, which is an absurd tautology. In the main, this clause re- mained inoperative. "Does there appear to be any desire on the part MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 497 of the employers that the boys should have such hours as to enable them to go to school?" "No; the hours are never shortened for that purpose." (n. The relative value of a commodity may vary, although its value remains constant. c, p. 18. Such a condition was al- ready supplied by the steam-engine. The rents are very high; 8 or £) persons packed in one sleeping apartment, in 2 cases 6 adults, each with 1 or 2 chil- dren in one small bedroom, THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 689 (5 .) Essex In this county, diminutions in the number of persons and of cottages go, in many parishes, hand in hand. Rep.," Evidence, p. 184-185.) 2 'The right of the poor to share in the tithe, is established by theten- our of ancient statutes." (Tuckett, 1. Therefore, in the value-relation of commodity A to commodity B, of the linen to the coat, not only is the latter, as value in gen- eral, made the equal in quality of the linen, but a definite quantity of coat (1 coat) is made the equivalent of a definite quantity (20 yards) of linen. 1071.) "If the tubs were fraudulently increased, a man could discontinue working by giv- ing 14 days' notice?" "But if he goes to another place, there is the same thing going on there." (n. He won't be caught napping again. It only brings it to a close, by stepping in as the absolute form of existence of exchange-value, or as the universal commodity. The wind-mill itself they got from Germany, where its invention was the origin of a pretty squabble be- tween the nobles, the priests, and the emperor, as to which of those three the wind "belonged." The air makes bondage, was the cry in Germany, at the same time that the wind was making Holland free. Goal consumed (for 100 horse-power indicated, at 4 lbs. 1 "There are numerous operations of so simple a kind as not to admit a division into parts, which cannot be performed without the co-operation of many pairs of hands. "The children gradually tire and become as restless as birds towards the end of their long detention at an occupa- tion that is monotonous, eye-straining, and exhausting from the uniformity in the posture of the body. c. 191, 192. So also physical forces, like steam, water, &c, when appropriated to productive processes, cost nothing. 3 EXPORT OF WOOL FROM THE CAPE TO GREAT BRITAIN. 12. they fulfil the provisions of the statutes by allowing an hour before 9 a. • 1. Its last word is the misery of constantly extending strata of the active army of labour, and the dead weight of pauperism. Berlin in 1858 could not provide its contingent of recruits; it was 156 men short." J. Let us assume that the line A B represents the length of the necessary working-time, say 6 hours. Diligence in some compels idleness in others. If we compare 1865 with 1864, there is a decrease in cereals of 246,667 qrs., of which 48,999 were wheat, 160,605 oats, 29,892 barley, &c: the decrease in potatoes was 446,398 tons, although the area of their cultivation increased in 1865. Evidently, only by labouring 200 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION productively in a particular way; the spinner by spinning, the weaver by weaving, the smith by forging. It wants larger numbers of youthful labourers, a smaller number of adults. Since the value of the constituent elements of the product is equal to the value of the advanced capital, it is mere tautology to say, that the excess of the value of the product over the value of its constituent elements, is equal to the expansion of the capital ad- vanced or to the surplus-value produced. Mod- ern manufacture wherever it arises — I do not here allude to modern industry based on machinery— either finds the disjecta membra poetse ready to hand, and only waiting to be collected together, as is the case in the manufacture of clothes in large towns, or it can easily apply the principle of division, simply by ex- clusively assigning the various operations of a handicraft (such as book-binding) to particular men. If the linen, or any other commodity serving as universal equivalent, 1 It is by no means self-evident that this character of direct and uni- versal exchangeability is, so to speak, a polar one, and as intimately con- nected with its opposite pole, the absence of direct exchangeability, as the positive pole of the magnet is with its negative counterpart. If the value created by a working-day of 12 hours be, say, six shillings, then, although the mass of the articles produced varies with the productiveness of labour, the only result is that the value represented by six shillings is spread over a greater or less number of articles. In 1861, the number of females employed in these industries, in England and Wales, amounted to 586,299, of these 115,242 at the least were under 20, and 16,650 under 15 years of age. 234 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION acquires it. These are made up in the same way as the common gang, but count fewer members, and work, not under a gang-master, but under some old farm servant, whom the farmer does not know how to employ in any better way. Therefore, according as A is placed in relation with one or the other, we get for one and the same commodity, different elementary expressions of value. must .... The collective labourer, formed by the combination of a num- ber of detail labourers, is the machinery specially characteristic of the manufacturing period. These are the beauties of "free" capitalist produc- tion!* The very defective Act, passed in 1872, is the first that reg- ulates the hours of labour of the children employed in mines, and makes exploiters and owners, to a certain extent, responsible for so-called accidents. of yarn. The value of labour-power, as dependent on its wear and tear, increases with the dura- tion of its functioning, and in more rapid proportion than the increase of that duration. of (nsp. It is only dur- ing the last decade (i.e., since 1856) that another American, Mr. Emery, of Albany, New York, has rendered Whitney's gin antiquated by an im- provement as simple as it is effective. Dunning, 1. The simultaneous employment of a large number of wage-labourers, in one and the same process, which is a necessary condition of this change, also forms the starting-point of capital- ist production. . There it is a definite social relation between men, that assumes, in their eyes, the fantastic form of a relation between things. 130 Reports, &c, I. The spinner has to pay something additional for juve- nile aid out of his additional sixpence, accompanied by displacing a portion of adults" (1. . c, p. Parents must not possess the absolute power of making their children mere 'machines to earn so much weekly wage.'. worth of red her- ring, Id. salt, Id. vinegar, 2d. The time necessary for their sale is superadded to that necessary for their production. c, n. Report," Lond., 1866, p. First, the individual differences balance one another in the workshop as a whole, which thus supplies in a given working-time the aver- age product, and the total wages paid will be the average wages of that particular branch of industry. It creates, on the one hand, new condi- tions by which capital is enabled to give free scope to this its constant tendency, and on the other hand, new motives with which to whet capital's appetite for the labour of others. . And whilst centralisation thus intensifies and accelerates the effects of accumulation, it simultaneously extends and speeds those revolutions in the technical composition of capital which raise its constant portion at the expense of its variable portion, thus diminishing the relative demand for labour. Irish genius discovered an altogether new way of spiriting a poor people thousands of miles away from the scene of its misery. If the work was very pressing, they could earn more. 2 Classic economy has, on account of a deficient analysis of the labour- process, and of the process of creating value, never properly grasped this weighty element of reproduction, as may be seen in Ricardo; he says, e.g., whatever the change in productive power, "a million men always produce in manufactures the same value." This is accurate, if the extension and degree of intensity of their labour are given. Hence there is immanent in capital an inclination and constant tendency, to heighten the productiveness of labour, in order to cheapen commodities, and by such cheapening to cheapen the labourer himself. We see, then, that labour is not the only source of material wealth, of use-values produced by labour. He will remember that the diet of a great part of the agricultural labourers' families is below the minimum necessary "to arrest starvation diseases." This is especially the case in all the purely rural districts of Cornwall, Devon, Somerset, Wilts, Stafford, Oxford, Berks, and Herts. 650-654, 701.) "Do you think that those widows could get employment anywhere else, which would bring them in as much wages as that (from 8s. 469.) "The constant aim and the tendency of every improvement in machinery is, in fact, to do away entirely with the labour of man, or to lessen its price by substi- tuting the labour of women and children for that of grown-up men, or of un- skilled for that of skilled workmen." (Ure, 1. the produce being greater when their joint labours are employed on one farm, there will be a surplus for manufactures, and by this means manu- factures, one of the mines of the nation, will increase, in propor- tion to the quantity of corn produced." 1 The stoical peace of mind with which the political economist regards the most shameless violation of the "sacred rights of property" and the grossest acts of violence to persons, as soon as they are necessary to lay the foundations of the capitalistic mode of production, is shown by Sir F. though it is evidently not on account of being net." (Th. Hopkins, "On Rent of Land, &c." London, 1828, p. 2 1. 1858 1861 1868 England and Wales 275,590 368,125 344,719 Scotland 21,624 30,110 31,864 Ireland 1,633 1,757 2,746 United Kingdom .... 318). The number of the workwomen employed in these workrooms varies from 20 to 40 in some, and from 10 to 20 in others. Both from the working-class itself, and from other ranks of society, there arose a cry for State aid, or for voluntary national subscriptions, in order to enable the "superfluous" hands to emi- grate to the colonies or to the United States. Capital only speaks of the system in its "normal" form. For the sake of conciseness I have classified them. Suppose the proc- ess of production to be stopped just when the workman has pro- duced an equivalent for the value of his own labour-power, when, for example, by six hours' labour, he has added a value of three shillings. Here as every- where else, we must distinguish between the increased produc- tiveness due to the development of the social process of production, and that due to the capitalist exploitation of that process. If the work be complicated, then the mere number of the men who co-operate allows of the various operations being apportioned to different hands, and, consequently, of being carried on simultaneously. These five detail workers are so many special organs of a single working organism that acts only as a whole, and therefore can operate only by the direct co- operation of the whole five. "As it was, he always felt restless at night, when he had closed his place, lest others should be working later than him and get- ting away his orders." 2 Summarising, the Gh. Empl. 19.) "The farmer now absurdly asserts, that he keeps the poor. "This did wonderfully concern the might and mannerhood of the kingdom to have farms as it were of a standard sufficient to maintain an able body out of penury, and did in effect amortise a great part of the lands of the kingdom unto the hold and occupation of the yeomanry or middle peo- ple, of a condition between gentlemen, and cottagers and peasants For it hath been held by the general opinion of men of best judgment in the wars.... Before they become money, gold, silver, and copper already possess such standard measures in their standards of weight, so that, for example, a pound weight, while serving as the unit, is, on the one hand, divisible into ounces, and, on the other, may be combined to make up hundredweights. G. Buying in order to sell, or, more accurately, buying in order to sell dearer, M — C — M', appears certainly to be a form peculiar to one kind of capital alone, namely, merchants' capital. At that time good wages could be earned. In the place of the lace-schools we find here the "straw-plait schools." The children commence their instruction in straw-plaiting generally in their 4th, often between their 3rd and 4th year. The new labour spent on the in- struments of labour, on the machinery, on the coal, and so on, must necessarily be less than the labour displaced by the use of the machinery; otherwise the product of the machine would be as dear, or dearer, than the product of the manual labour. 1 It extends the labourer's time of production during a given period by shortening his actual life- time. 2 L. . The value of the means of production is there- fore preserved, by being transferred to the product. Fact, for 31st October, 1858," p. and 6 p. l Hence, as a necessary consequence, the modern doctrine that a nation becomes the richer the more deeply it is in debt. There is, however, a second mode of acquiring things, to which we may by preference and with correctness give the name of Chre- matistic, and in this case there appear to be no limits to riches and posses- sions. The fact that they could live for a whole week on the wage of four days, did not appear to the labourers a sufficient reason that they should work the other two days for the capitalist. The primary or isolated relative form of value of one com- modity converts some other commodity into an isolated equivalent. 49, 50.) THE CONCEPT OP RELATIVE SURPLUS-VALUE 319 plus-value, do collectively. The 12 masons, in their collective working- day of 144 hours, make much more progress with the building than one mason could make working for 12 days, or 144 hours. If here and there one of the lowest class by uncommon industry, and pinching his belly, lifts himself above the condition he was brought up in, nobody ought to hinder him; nay, it is undeniably the wisest course for every person in the society, and for every private family to be frugal; but it is the interest of all rich na- tions, that the greatest part of the poor should almost never be idle, and yet continually spend what they get . Polit." Paris, 1815), Ganilh enumerates in a striking manner in opposition to the "Physio- crats" the long series of previous processes necessary before agriculture properly so called can commence. 634 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION they have control, the nearest town or open village receive the evicted labourers: the nearest, I say, but this "nearest" may mean three or four miles distant from the farm where the labourer has his daily toil. 1. In order that his labour may re -appear in a commodity, he must, before all things, expend it on something useful, on something capable of satisfying a want of some sort. In America the cultivation of land is often the secondary pursuit of a blacksmith, a miller or a shop- keeper." 1 With such queer people as these, where is the "field of abstinence" for the capitalists? 3.) John Stuart Mill, who for a long time was an official of the East India Com- MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OF COMMODITIES 135 interval of time, from the realisation of their prices. a daily surplus-value of nx3s. Within the last few days the walls of London have been placarded with large posters, bearing the following remarkable announcement: — 'Fat oxen! Starving men! The fat oxen from their palace of glass have gone to feed the rich in their luxu- rious abode, while the starving men are left to rot and die in their wretched dens.' The placards bearing these ominous words are put up at certain inter- vals. * This law which, by means of State compulsion, confined the struggle between capital and labour within limits comfortable for capital, has outlived revolutions and changes of dynasties. When a person gets through all his property, by taking upon himself debts equal to the value of that property, it is clear that his property represents nothing but the sum total of his debts. 6d., or 3s. Our analysis of absolute surplus-value had reference primarily to the extension or duration of the labour, its intensity being as- sumed as given. 2 Under such fa- vourably prepared conditions the agitation among the factory workers for the repeal of the Act of 1847 was begun. Although labour-power would be unchanged in price, it would be above its value. So far as division of labour re-appears in the factory, it is primarily a distribution of the workmen among the specialised machines; and of masses of workmen, not however organised into groups, among the various departments of the factory, in each of which they work at a number of similar machines placed together; their co-operation, therefore, is only simple. F. Si Ton gagnait longtemps en tout avec tous, il faudrait rendre de bon accord les plus grandes parties du profit pour recommencer le jeu." (Pinto: "Traite de la Circulation et du Credit." Amster- dam, 1771, p. Feverishly over-worked in summer, and half-starved in winter, it is no wonder if they say in their peculiar dialect, "the parson and gentlefolk seem frit to death at them." At Floore, instances, in one bedroom of the smallest size, of couples with 4, 5, 6 children; 3 adults with 5 children; a couple with grandfather and 6 children down with scarlet fever, &c; in two houses with two bedrooms, two families of 8 and 9 adults respectively. "Increased demand on the part of the labourers means nothing more than their willingness to take less of their own product for themselves, and leave a greater part of it to their employers; and if it be said, that this begets glut, by lessening consumption" (on the part of the labourers), "I can only reply that glut is synonymous with large profits." 2 The learned disputation, how the booty pumped out of the labourer may be divided, with most advantage to accumulation, between the industrial capitalist and the rich idler, was hushed in face of the revolution of July. c, pp. c, p. SECTION 3.— THE PROXIMATE EFFECTS OF MACHINERY ON THE WORKMAN The starting-point of Modern Industry is, as we have shown, the revolution in the instruments of labour, and this revolution attains its most highly developed form in the organised system of machinery in a factory. And will not own that he has done it, and thinks no one will find him out, because the oxen, drawn back- wards into his den, make it seem, from their foot-prints, that they have been let out. Military service, which hastened to so great an extent the ruin of the Roman plebeians, was also the chief means by which, as in a forcing-house, Charlemagne brought about the transformation of free German peasants into serfs and bondsmen. x 1 The above data, which may be relied upon, were given me by a Man- chester spinner. . Later he found it convenient to suppress the MS. Compulsory labour is just as properly measured by time, as commodity-producing labour; but every serf knows that what he expends in the service of his lord, is a definite quantity of his own personal labour-power. c, 74.) 2 "Historical and descriptive account of Brit India, v &c ," by Hugh Mur- ray and James Wilson, &c, Edinburgh 1832. He creates surplus-value which, for the capitalist, has all the charms of a creation out of nothing. labour-power its full value.) 1 The "Cyclops Steel and Iron Works," of Messrs. You sever the distaff and the plough, the spin- dle and the yoke, and you get factories and poor-houses, credit and panics, two hostile nations, agricultural and commercial." (David Urquhart, 1. Of the Christian colonial system, W. B. 5.) A careful comparison of this book with Hume's "Essays," proves to my mind without doubt that Hume was acquainted with and made use of Vanderlint's work, which is certainly an important one. It cut the paper, pasted, folded, and finished 300 in a minute. Though he chanted to us the whole creed of the economists, in reality, he says, he would not give a brass farthing for it. c, p. The decrease, often by leaps and bounds in the number of children under 13 years employed in factories, a decrease that is shown in an astonishing manner by the English statistics of the last 20 years, was for the most part, according to the evidence of the factory inspectors them- selves, the work of the certifying surgeons, who overstated the age of the children, agreeably to the capitalist's greed for exploi- 1 In striking contrast with the great fact, that the shortening of the hours of labour of women and children in English factories was exacted from capital by the male operatives, we find in the latest reports of the Chil- dren's Employment Commission traits of the operative parents in relation to the traffic in children, that are truly revolting and thoroughly like slave- dealing. 5 Reports, &c, for 31st Oct., 1861, p. Consequently, they must all change hands. All commodities being equated to linen now appear not only as qualitatively equal as values generally, but also as values whose magnitudes are capable of comparison. From that moment the distinction becomes firmly established between the utility of an object for the purposes of consumption, and its utility for the purposes of ex- change. The simplicity of the organisation for production in these self-sufficing communities that constantly reproduce themselves in the same form, and when accidentally destroyed, spring up again on the spot and with the same name 2 — this simplicity supplies the key to the secret of the unchangeableness of Asiatic societies, an un- changeableness in such striking contrast with the constant dissolu- tion and refounding of Asiatic States, and the never-ceasing changes of dynasty. Whatever is useful to this queer normal man, and to his world, is absolute- ly useful. For example, let the working-day of each individual be 12 hours. to work 14 hours a day with or without meals," &c. We might just as well try to retain Catholicism with- out the Pope. . This law of the progressive increase in constant capital, in propor- tion to the variable, is confirmed at every step (as already shown) by the comparative analysis of the prices of commodities, whether we compare different economic epochs or different nations in the same epoch. of yarn. the injury to workpeople who are not employed on piece-work, but receive weekly wages." (Leonard Horner in "Reports of Insp. 181, 182.) "Nor can T conceive a greater curse upon a body of people, than to be thrown upon a spot of land, where the productions for subsistence and food were, in great measure, spontaneous, and the climate required or admitted little care for raiment and covering . Third, the demoralised and ragged, and those unable to work, chiefly people who succumb to their incapacity for adaptation, due to the division of labour; people who have passed the normal age of the labourer; the victims of industry, whose num- ber increases with the increase of dangerous machinery, of mines, chemical works, &c, the mutilated, the sickly, the widows, &c. The whole class of workmen that depend exclusively on their skill, is now done away with. * But we have no need to refer to the origin of capital in order to dis- cover that the first form of appearance of capital is money. This power is developed gratuitously, whenever the workmen are placed under given con- ditions, and it is capital that places them under such conditions. 16, § 3.) 4 "Undoubtedly much of the work now done by children in gangs used to be done by men and women. owe their superior advantages by no means to any superior abilities of their own, but almost entirely ... The seller therefore pockets a surplus-value of 10. sqq. If one coat represents x days' labour, two coats represent 2x days' labour, and so on. 447. for the reduction in time, together 2s. It is, e.g., for that arising from prof- its between 1853 to 1857, 1.73% yearly; 1857-1861, 2.74%, and for 1861-64, 9.30% yearly. This occurs constantly under the every-day form of pre- payments. . . 25 708 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION "The towns have had to receive from year to year what was deemed to be the surplus-labour of the rural division; 1 and then people still wonder "there is still a surplus of labour in the towns and villages, and either a scarcity or a threatened scarcity in some of the country divisions." 2 The truth is that this want only becomes perceptible "in harvest-time, or during spring, or at such times as agricultural operations are carried on with astivity; at other periods of the year many hands are idle;" 3 that "from the digging out of the main crop of potatoes in October until the early spring following . "Thirty years ago (1841) one spinner with three piecers was not required to attend to more than one pair of mules with 300-324 spindles. Hence there sprang up the extraordinary notion, that the value of gold is estimated in its own material, and that, in contradistinction to all other commodities, its price is fixed by the State. I am the giant of Giant Castle, and have eat up all my neighbours." THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 693 well as in spring and summer, at those frequently recurring times when English agriculture, so careful and intensive, wants extra hands. 2 "Reports from the Poor Law Inspectors on the Wages of Agricultural Labourers in Dublin," 1870. 2.) According to this same Strype, in Somersetshire, in one year, 40 per- sons were executed, 35 robbers burnt in the hand, 37 whipped, and 183 dis- charged as "incorrigible vagabonds." Nevertheless, he is pf opinion that this lara:e number of prisoners does not comprise even a fifth of the actual crimi- nals, thanks tc the negligence of the justices and the foolish compassion of the people; and the other counties of England were not better oft in this respect than Somersetshire, while some were even worse. Hard work, saving, and avarice, are, therefore, his three cardinal virtues, and to sell much and buy little the sum of his political economy. In the manufacture of matches it was thought to be an indispensable requirement, that boys, even while bolting their dinner, should go on dipping the matches in melted phosphorus, the poisonous vapour from which rose into their faces. The first definition given above of productive labour, a definition deduced from the very nature of the produc- tion of material objects, still remains correct for the collective labourer, considered as a whole. Skilled labour counts only as simple labour intensified, or rather, as multiplied simple labour, a given quantity of skilled being considered equal to a greater quantity of simple labour. c, t. The lengthening of the mule causes some increase of labour, he admits. With the setting free of a part of the agricultural population, therefore, their former means of nourishment were also set free. During meal-times they lie at full length in the fields, or watch the boys bathing in a neigh- bouring canal. Id. 1 Even in this miserable state of things, however, the inventive spirit of the master never stood still, but was exercised in making deductions from wages. The workpeople resisted, and said that the only remedy was to work short time, 4 days a-week; and their theory was the correct one. The value created by a working-day of 12 hours is a constant quantity, say, six shillings. 16). Simple average labour, it is true, varies in character in different countries and at different times, but in a particular society it is given. . An example of the first sort is the mowing-machine; it replaces co-operation between mowers. Nevertheless, Ricardo's school simply shirked the problem, they did not solve it. 53.) On the vileness of this system, cf. This "flesh and blood" were, therefore, "their money." Hence, the Shylock-law of the Ten Tables. 8d., 3s. If commodities, or commodities and money, of equal exchange- value, and consequently equivalents, are exchanged, it is plain that no one abstracts more value from, than he throws into, circulation. m. 196.) 330 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION bour-powers, or the amount of the wages of these labourers for a day, or a week, as the case may be, must be ready in the pocket of the capitalist, before the workmen are assembled for the proc- ess of production. informed me that he employed females exclusively at his power-looms . Paper money is a token representing gold or money. "Lectures on Polit. The gang-master goes from one farm to another, and thus employs his gang from 6 to 8 months in the year. 2 "Capital pre-supposes wage-labour, and wage-labour pre-supposes capital. The owners of commodities therefore find out, that the same division of labour that turns them into independent private producers, * Tn his letter of November 28, 1878, to N. During the last 5 years, the diminution of the agricultural percentage of the population has been yet more marked. 103,751 ,455 lbs. . "The agriculturist, after several hours' exposure to wind and rain, gains his cottage to sit by a fire of peat or of balls of clay and small coal kneaded together, from which volumes of carbonic and sulphurous acids are poured forth. . While within the workshop, the iron law of proportionality subjects definite num- bers of workmen to definite functions, in the society outside the workshop, chance and caprice have full play in distributing the producers and their means of production among the various branches of industry. c, p. In fact they give, by grace of God and law, the Sandersons a cheque on the working-time of a certain number of hands for all the 24 hours of the day, and they lose their character as capital, are therefore a pure loss for the Sandersons, as soon as their func- tion of absorbing labour is interrupted. . m. of cotton+the value of a whole spindle, i.e., if the same working-time is required to produce the commodities on either side of this equation, then 10 lbs. The uncertainty and instability to which machinery subjects the em- ployment, and consequently the conditions of existence, of the operatives become normal, owing to these periodic changes of the industrial cycle. This is quite as characteristic of ancient classical society as Franklin's definition of man, as a tool-making animal, is characteristic of Yankeedom. This was done on the larg- est scale, and as if in obedience to a command from on high. But from the small proportion of boys that we em- ploy, the subject (i.e., of restrictions on night-work) is of little importance or interest to us." 1 Mr. J. The old nobility had been devoured by the great feudal wars. (Manufacture is used here in the sense of all non-agricultural industries.) 2 This source of relative surplus-population is thus constantly flowing. Hence, for a given interval of time dur- ing the process of circulation, we have the following relation: the quantity of money functioning as the circulating medium is equal to the sum of the prices of the commodities divided by the number of moves made by coins of the same denomination. The buyer takes it from the hands of the seller and passes it into the hands of another buyer. Duffy, Minister of Public Lands. 1 Moreover, when once this fractional work is established as the exclusive function of one person, the methods it employs become perfected. The supervision and enforcement of this law are, in a country where every mouse is under police administration, left to the good-will of the amis du commerce. To accumulate it is necessary to convert a portion of the sur- plus-product into capital. The product therefore of one of the former hours has as much or more value than has the product of W of the latter hours. Payments. The mode in which manufacture arises, its growth out of hand- icrafts, is therefore two-fold. What B claims, and has a right to claim, is that the capitalist should pay him the value of his labour-power. 7.) "Silver and gold, coined or uncoined, though they are used for a measure of all other things, are no less a commodity than wine, oil, tobacco, cloth, or stuffs." ("A Discourse concerning Trade, and that in particular of the East Indies," &c. The crisis of 1866, which fell most heavily on London, created in this centre of the world-market, more populous than the kingdom of Scotland, an increase of pauperism for the year 1866 of 19.5% compared with 1865, and of 24.4% compared with 1864, and a still greater increase for the first months of 1867 as compared with 1866. The history of this expropriation, in different countries, assumes different aspects, and runs through its various phases in different orders of succession, and at different periods. 743 958 894 805 1,262 1,747 1,145 2,093 2,367 1 "Public Health. "A Treatise of Taxes and Contri- butions." Lond., 1667, p. Just as the substance iron, as a measure of weight, represents in relation to the sugar-loaf weight alone, so, in our expression of value, the material object, coat, in relation to the linen, represents value alone. a cheaper workman." (Ure, 1. The guilds zeal- ously repelled every encroachment by the capital of merchants, the only form of free capital with which they came in contact. But the price of corn is seven times, and of flesh-meat and raiment about fifteen times higher. That in their appearance things often repre- sent themselves in inverted form is pretty well known in every science except Political Economy. Of course the ratio of surplus-value not only to that portion of the capital from which it immediately springs, and whose change of value it represents, but also to the sum total of the capital advanced is economically of very great importance. However terrible and disgusting the dissolution, under the capitalist system, of the old family ties may appear, nevertheless, modern industry, by assigning as it does an important part in the process of production, imitators) "leaves the children's minds silly." ("Proposals for Raising a Col- ledge of Industry of all Useful Trades and Husbandry." Lond., 1696, pp. No; 6 miles away, so that he walks daily, to and fro, 12 miles. 4,669,979 divided among 18,081 persons. In order to entice the money out of that pocket, our friend's commodity must, above all things, be a use-value to the owner of the money. On the other hand, the raising of taxation caused by the accumulation of debts contracted one after another, compels the government always to have recourse to new loans for new extraordinary expenses. Commodities circulate, whose equivalent in money will not appear on the scene till some future day. . MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 459 race" (the wholesale extinction of Indian hand-loom weavers). c, p. D. If therefore production is called an exchange of labour and means of production against the product, it is clear as day that you obtain more exchange-value in proportion as the production yields more use-value. In the first place, it must be observed that the machinery, while always entering as a whole into the labour-process, enters into the value-begetting process only by bits. . 4,648,611 yds. But, for all that, wisdom of this kind flourishes even now in certain circles under the name of "science." Never has any school played more tricks with the word science, than that of Proudhon, for "wo Begriffe fehlen, Da stellt zur rechten Zeit ein Wort sich ein." COMMODITIES 69 were, at the same time, to share in the relative form of value, it would have to serve as its own equivalent. If the vagabond gives a false birthplace, he is then to become the slave for life of this place, of its inhabitants, or its corporation, and to be branded with an S. We have shown that the surplus-value produced by a given capital is equal to the surplus-value produced by each workman multiplied by the number of workmen simultaneously employed. But, if the progress of accumulation lessens the relative magnitude of the variable part of capital, it by no means, in doing this, excludes the possibility of a rise in its absolute magni- tude. This power is secured to them only by the command of machinery and of manual labour. The process disappears in the product; the latter is a use-value, Nature's material adapted by a change of form to the wants of man. * Factory Inspectors, and at the same time Parliament was, by petitions from the operatives, bereft of its notions as to the cool meadow-fragrance, in which bleaching in the open-air was reported to take place. 117.) 2 E.g., in paper-staining before the recent introduction into this trade of the Factory Act. While simple co-operation leaves the mode of working by the individual for the most part unchanged, manufacture thorough- ly revolutionises it, and seizes labour-power by its very roots. to 8 p. This law of capitalistic society would sound absurd to savages, or even civilised colonists. An example will show, in conclusion, how this sophistication, peculiar to and characteristic of capitalist production, this complete inversion of the relation between dead and living labour, between value and the force that creates value, mirrors itself in the consciousness of capitalists. Shortly before that time, the works for a railway from Lew- isham to Tunbridge were commenced here, and, in addition to the principal works being in the immediate neighbourhood of this town, here was also established the depot for the whole of the works, so that a large number of persons was of necessity employed here. It might thus as well have been submerged under the waters of the German Ocean.... B. The advance consisted in a change of form of this servitude, in the transformation of feudal exploitation into capitalist exploitation. This circular movement, in which the same phases are continually gone through in succession, forms the circulation of capital. The value of labour-power, i.e., the labour-time requisite to produce labour-power, deter- mines the labour-time necessary for the reproduction of that value. 1 Division of labour in a society, and the corresponding tying down of individuals to a particular calling, develops itself, just as does the division of labour in manufacture, from opposite starting- points. . Nevertheless, Ricardo himself pays so little attention to the two-fold character of the la- bour which has a two-fold embodiment, that he devotes the whole of his chapter on "Value and Riches, Their Distinctive Properties," to a laborious examination of the trivialities of a J. The misery of the agricultural population forms the pedestal for gigantic shirt-factories, whose armies of labourers are, for the most part, scattered over the country. One portion he lays out in buy- ing weavers, the other in woollen yarn, machinery, &c. We stated, on a previous page, that in the creation of surplus- value it does not in the least matter, whether the labour ap- propriated by the capitalist be simple unskilled labour of aver- age quality or more complicated skilled labour. 1 A. It follows therefore that in proportion as capital accumulates, the lot of the labourer, be his payment high or low, must grow worse. Its leading mo- tive, and the goal that attracts it, is therefore mere exchange- value. . 55-58. CAPITALIST PRODUCTION at its zenith. Newman, "Lectures on Political Economy." London, 1851, pp. But now the capitalist buys children and young persons under age. 1 The general and necessary tendencies of capital must be distinguished from their forms of manifestation. Cf. F. The price at which they buy their wages was shown on an earlier page. m. In the labour- process it only serves as a mere use-value, a thing with useful properties, and could not, therefore, transfer any value to the product, unless it possessed such value previously. They are, however, commodities, only because they are something two-fold, both objects of utility, and, at the same time, depositories of value. 22.) SIMPLE REPRODUCTION 569 as means of production, and transfer their value to the product. Superin- tendence is here completely dispensed with." (Cairnes, 1. In this case 20 yards of linen continue equal to 1 coat, however much their values may have altered. c.) 1 See Goethe's "Faust." 594 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION a thousand sources of sudden enrichment. 123, 124, 125, 140, and 54. "It is one of the most melancholy features in the social state of this country," says Glad- stone, "that while there was a decrease in the consuming powers of the people, and while there was an increase in the privations and distress of the labouring class and operatives, there was at the same time a constant accumulation of wealth in the upper classes, and a constant increase of capital." 8 Thus spake this unctuous min- ister in the House of Commons of February 13th, 1843. [Note to 2nd edition. F. In the "Letters on the Factory Act," he makes the whole net gains including "profit" and "interest," and even "some- thing more," depend upon a single unpaid hour's work of the labourer. Many of the cottages are simply lodging-houses, through which all the rabble of the neighbourhood passes. In North- amptonshire, in 1795, the average weekly wage was 7s. This relative increase in the value of the variable' capital, or the relative magnitude of the surplus- value, I call, "The rate of surplus-value." 1 We have seen that the labourer, during one portion of the labour-process, produces only the value of his labour-power, that is, the value of his means of subsistence. The two things compared are, the value of the product and the value of its constituents consumed in the process of pro- duction. the parents of children would seek employment for their children in other directions, for instance, in manufacture?" "Not generally I think" (n. In order to carry out more perfectly the division of labour in manufacture, a single branch of production is, according to the varieties of its raw material, or the various forms that one and the same raw material may assume, split up into numerous, and to some extent, entirely new manufactures. Only as personified capital is the capitalist respectable. 22. Bedroom: 8 ft. Wherever I refer to the composi- tion of capital, without further qualification, its organic com- position is always understood. The consequences were, according to the medical report we received, that in the night-time these poor people were compelled to endure all the horror of suffocation to avoid the pestiferous smells arising from the filthy, stagnant water, and the privies close under their win- dows. "In the economy of a nation, advantages and evils always balance one another (il bene ed il male economico in una nazione sempre all, istessa mi- sura): the abundance of wealth with some people, is always equal to the want of it with others (la copia dei beni in alcuni sempre eguale alia mancanza di essi in altri): the great riches of a small number are always accompanied by the absolute privation of the first necessaries of life for many others. It is to be seen everywhere, in harvest-time as 1 "The heaven-born employment of the hind gives dignity even to his position. 219, and Gisborne: "Enquiry into the Duties GENESIS OF THE INDUSTRIAL CAPITALIST 759 With the development of capitalist production during the manufacturing period, the public opinion of Europe had lost the last remnant of shame and conscience. Of course capital also is advanced in the shape of money.... LENGTH OF THE WORKING-DAY VARIABLE The working-day may vary in two ways. 2 EXPORT OF COTTON FROM INDIA TO GREAT BRITAIN. The minimum limit of the value of labour-power is deter- mined by the value of the commodities, without the daily supply of which the labourer cannot renew his vital energy, consequently by the value of those means of subsistence that are physically indispensable. By labour-power or capacity for labour is to be understood the aggregate of those mental and physical capabilities existing in a human being, which he exercises whenever he produces a use-value of any description. The mechanical lathe is only a cyclopean reproduction of the ordinary foot-lathe; the planing machine, an iron carpenter, that works on iron with the same tools that the human carpenter employs on wood; the instru- ment that, on the London wharves, cuts the veneers, is a gigantic razor; the tool of the shearing machine, which shears iron as easily as a tailor's scissors cut cloth, is a monster pair of scissors; and the steam-hammer works with an ordinary hammer head, but of such a weight that not Thor himself could wield it. . 2 "The employer .... "In Limerick, where the grievances of the journeymen are dem- onstrated to be excessive, the movement has been defeated by the opposition of the master bakers, the miller bakers being the greatest opponents. This shows that the two properties of labour, by virtue of which it is enabled in one case to preserve value, and in the other to create value, are essentially different. Whether that labour is useful for others, and its product consequently capable of satisfying the wants of others, can be proved only by the act of exchange. If the limit of the working-day is given, and also the limit of its necessary constituent, the mass of value and surplus-value that an individual capitalist produces, is clearly exclusively dependent on the mass of labour that he sets in motion. By one of the People called Christians," 4th Edition, Oxford, 1784, Dr. Home, Bishop of Norwich, reproves Adam Smith, because in a published letter to Mr. Strahan, he "embalmed his friend David" (sc. in fact be reduced by a third, perhaps, and that then there will be a healthy demand for the remaining two-thirds.... A pound of cotton wool, previously costing 50 cents to produce, in- cluded after that invention more unpaid labour, and was conse- quently sold with greater profit, at 10 cents. But," he adds sympathetically, "I can understand the loss of time not being liked." The report of the Commission opines with naivete that the fear of some "leading firms" of losing time, i.e., the time for appropriating the labour of others, and thence losing profit is not a sufficient reason for allowing children under 13, and young persons under 18, working 12 to 16 hours per day, to lose their dinner, nor for giving it to them as coal and water are supplied to the steam-engine, soap to wool, oil to the wheel — as merely auxiliary material to the instruments of labour, during the process of production itself. 2 The different proportions in which different sorts of labour are reduced to unskilled labour as their standard, are established by a social process that goes on behind the backs of the producers, and, consequently, appear to be fixed by custom. A small rise that, in the face of the enormous extension of this industry and implying a great fall proportionally in the number of labourers employed. In a return of the 30th April, ... If we abstract from the material substance of the circulation of commodities, that is, from the exchange of the various use- values, and consider only the economic forms produced by this process of circulation, we find its final result to be money: this final product of the circulation of commodities is the first form in which capital appears. These national averages form a scale, whose unit of measure is the average unit of universal labour. c, p. 3 "If the price of labour should rise so high that, notwithstanding the increase of capital, no more could be employed, I should say that such in- crease of capital would be still unproductively consumed." (Ricardo, 1. In most striking contrast with this accentuation of quantity and exchange- value, is the attitude of the writers of classical antiqui- ty, who hold exclusively by quality and use-value. Thus, on the one hand, the technical reason for the life-long annexation of the workman to a detail function is re- moved. von Liebig: "Die Chemie in ihrer Anwendung auf Agrikultur und Physiologie, 1862," 7th Ed., vol. c, t. Whoever eats up, robs, and steals the nourishment of another, that man commits as greata murder (so far as in him CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO CAPITAL 593 But original sin is at work everywhere. "In the first stone which he [the savage] flings at the wild animal he pursues, in the first stick that he seizes to strBe down the fruit which hangs above his reach, we see the ap- propriation of one article for the purpose of aiding in jthe acquisition of an- other, and thus discover the origin of capital." (R. of Fact., 31st Oct., 1865," p. CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO CAPITAL 601 both in France and in Holland." 1 Twenty years later, an Ameri- can humbug, the baronised Yankee, Benjamin Thompson (alias Count Rumford) followed the same line of philanthropy to the great satisfaction of God and man. MacGulloch's exception therefore proves only his misapprehension of the rule, a misfortune that as often happens to him in the vulgarisation of Ricardo, as it does to J. Machinery, with a few exceptions to be mentioned later, oper- ates only by means of associated labour, or labour in common. 314.) The English Factory Inspector, Alexander Redgrave, in his Report of Oct. weekly. Here we have again the co-operation by di- vision of labour that characterises Manufacture; only now, it is a combination of detail machines. profit v by the transgression of the legal limits of work. Dr. Simon remarks that the mortality among the London tailors and printers between the ages of 25 and 35 is in fact much greater, be- cause the employers in London obtain from the country a great number of young people up to 30 years of age, as "apprentices" and "improvers," who come for the purpose of being perfected in their trade. and xliv.) Mean- while, late by night perhaps, self-denying Mr. Glass-Capital, primed with port wine, reels out of his club homeward droning out idiotically, "Britons never, never shall be slaves!" 1 In England even now occasionally in rural districts a labourer is condemned to imprisonment for desecrating the Sabbath, by working in his front garden. He was prosecuted for breach of contract, and condemned to two months' imprisonment. Winslow. c, Evidence, pp. This increase is effected by the simple process that constantly "sets free" a part of the labourers; by methods which lessen the number of labourers employed in proportion to the increased production. c, p. At the end of the 17th and the beginning oi the 18th centuries the factors (agents) that crowded into every possible trade were still denounced as "public nuisances." Thus the Grand Jury at the quar- ter session of the Justices of the Peace for the County of Somerset, addressed a presentment to the Lower House which, among other things, states, "that these factors of Blackwell Hall are a Public Nuisance and Prejudice to the Clothing Trade, and ought to be put down as a Nuisance." "The Case of our English Wool., &c," London, 1685, pp. If now we further suppose the price of each commodity to be given, the sum of the prices clearly depends on the mass of commodities in circulation. x Although the working-day is not a fixed, but a fluent quan- tity, it can, on the other hand, only vary within certain limits. 48, 49.) 2 Sir James Steuart, a writer altogether remarkable for his quick eye lor the characteristic social distinctions between different modes of produc- tion, says: "Why do large undertakings in the manufacturing way ruin private industry, but by coming nearer to the simplicity of slaves?" ("Prin. M. Increased produc- tiveness of labour also, it is true, will supply more products in a given working-day. Time for education, for intel- lectual development, for the fulfilling of social functions and for social intercourse, for the free-play of his bodily and men- tal activity, even the rest time of Sunday (and that in a country of Sabbatarians!) 1 — moonshine! But in its blind un- walks during the performance of his work 15-20 miles in every 6 hours! And the work often lasts 14 or 15 hours! In many of these glass works, as in the Moscow spinning mills, the system of 6 hours' relays is in force. The depopulation of Ireland has thrown much of the land out of cultivation, has greatly diminished the produce of the soil, 1 and, in spite of the greater area devoted to cattle breed- ing, has brought about, in some of its branches, an absolute diminution, in others, an advance scarcely worthy of mention, and constantly interrupted by retrogressions. When treating of the working-day, we saw that the labourer is often compelled to make his individual consumption a mere in- cident of production. Shirts, for instance, are a necessary means of subsistence, but are only one out of many. If, then, the expansion of value is once aimed at, there is just the same inducement to augment the value of the £110 as that of the £100; for both are but limited expressions for exchange-value, and therefore both have the same vocation to approach, by quan- titative increase, as near as possible to absolute wealth. In pro- portion therefore as commodities in general acquire their true prices, in proportion as their values become estimated according to the fallen value of the precious metal, in the same proportion the quantity of that metal necessary for realising those new prices is provided beforehand. 3 Storch calls true raw materials "matieres," and accessory material "materiaux." Gherbuliez describes accessories as "matieres instrumentales.'* 182 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION Every object possesses various properties, and is thus capable of being applied to different uses. But as further the mass of surplus-value which a single labourer produces, the value of labour-power being given, is determined by the rate of the surplus-value, this law follows: the mass of the surplus-value produced is equal to the amount of the variable capital advanced, multiplied by the rate of surplus-value; in other words: it is de- termined by the compound ratio between the number of labour- powers exploited simultaneously by the same capitalist and the degree of exploitation of each individual labour-power. In other words, there is contained in 1 lb. de Molinari: "fitudes ficonomiques". Besides the factory operatives, the manufacturing workmen and the handicraftsmen, whom it concentrates in large masses at one spot, and directly commands, capital also sets in 1 Mr. Gillott erected in Birmingham the first steel-pen factory on a large scale. That old-fashioned industry has now been converted into an outside department of the factory, the manufactory, or the warehouse. Further: the splitting up of the means of production into the individual prop- erty of many independent labourers, working on their own ac- count, he calls equal division of capital. This is quite in accordance with the spirit of a language that likes to use a Teutonic word for the actual thing, and a Romance word for its reflexion. Only consider the course of events. "The operatives. For, according to our previous analysis, the value of the constant capital re-appears in the value of the product, but does not enter into the newly produced value, the newly cre- ated value-product. l They were locked up in that "moral workhouse," the cotton districts, and they form, as before, 'the strength" of the cotton manufacturers of Lancashire. — TheBethnal Green silk industry is now almost destroyed — F E.\ 2 "Children's Employment Commission, Third Report," London, 1864, p. . The limits of this book compel us to concern ourselves chiefly with the worst paid part of the industrial proletariat, and with the agri- cultural labourers, who together form the majority of the woik- ing-class. II, p. The one arises from use, as coins wear away by circulating, the other from non-use, as a sword rusts when left in its scabbard. 12, 13.) As to the further development of this theory by Ricardo and his disciples, James Mill, Lord Overstone, and others, see MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OF COMMODITIES 125 the establishment of a standard of prices, is the business of the State. Secondly, the product is the property of the capitalist and not that of the labourer, its immediate producer. He profits, not only by what he receives from, but by what he gives to, the labourer. But since there are always several generations of labourers living at one time, and working together at the manufacture of a given article, the technical skill, the tricks of the trade thus acquired, become es- tablished, and are accumulated and handed down. Hence, furnaces and workshops constitute lawful claims upon the night-labour of the workpeople. The more nearly the time approached for the coming into full force of the Factory Act, the fatal year 1836, the more wildly raged the mob of manufacturers. See the Westminster Review for example. If you abolish the knife — you hurl us back into the depths of barbarism." 2 Although machinery necessarily throws men out of work in those industries into which it is introduced, yet it may, not- withstanding this, bring about an increase of employment in other industries. Ought not Mr. Carey to con- sider further whether those "State expenses" are not the "natural" fruits of capitalistic development? We will take the blacksmith as a type. This splitting-up of the total social capital into many indi- vidual capitals or the repulsion of its fractions one from another, is counteracted by their attraction. Exchange-value is a thing that is connected one way or another with exchange. On Sundays the men must attend twice or three times during the day for an hour or two to make prep- arations for the next day's bread. If now our spinner by work- ing for one hour, can convert 1-| lbs. 717 CHAPTER XXVII EXPROPRIATION OF THE AGRICULTURAL POPULATION FROM THE LAND In England, serfdom had practically disappeared in the last part of the 14th century. of Insp. On the one hand, then, it is by virtue of its general character, as being expenditure of human labour-power in the abstract, that spinning adds new value to the values of the cotton and the spin- dle; and on the other hand, it is by virtue of its special character, 1 "Labour gives a new creation for one extinguished." ("An Essay on the Polit. Just the contrary. The orthodox Parliament will hear nothing of Sabbath-breaking if it occurs in the process of expanding capital. And the ideal this time fades before the reality. 2 "Ch. Empl. THE WORKING-DAY 239 expression of the same greed. An official report says: "This one town of Macassar, e.g., is full of secret prisons, one more horrible than the other, crammed with unfortunates, victims of greed and tyranny fettered in chains, forcibly torn from their families." To secure Malacca, the Dutch corrupted the Portuguese governor. MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 485 changed by the printing machine. If one that Wiey would only accept wages by the hour under two conditions (l)i that, with the price of the working-hour, a normal working-day of 9 and 10 hours respectively should be fixed, and that the price of the hour for the 10 hoursj working-day should be higher than that for the hour of the 9 hours' working-day; (2), that every hour beyond the normal working-day should be reckoned as over-time and proportionally more highly paid. Empl. Thereby the technical foundation on which is based the division of labour in Manufacture, is swept away. The restless never-ending process of profit-making alone 1 Aristotle opposes (Economic to Chrematistic. The sum of all is — slavery! 1 Dr. Richardson, t c. ... 2 With regard to the work of the mere attendants, it can, to some extent, be replaced in the mill by machines, 3 and owing 1 Ure grants this. Rent of Land 13,893,829 2,765,387 4,891,652 22,962,885 13,003,554 2,773,644 4,836,203 32,998,394 Schedule B. of yarn in the market, he must pay fifteen shillings for them. . Although their industry more than any other depends on naviga- tion, yet experience has given them the lie. This point is to be found at the source of production of the metal, at which place gold is bartered, as the immediate product of labour, for some other product of equal value. Then, making the same assump- tions as in former instances, the real degree of exploitation of labour will be represented in the following proportions. 290 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION allow themselves to be turned from their purpose. 20-21. His answer is unlike that of Ure, Senior, &c, and their puny German plagiarists a la Roscher who are touched by the "abstinence," "self-denial," "saving," of the capitalists in the expenditure of their gold, and by their Timur-Tamer- lanish prodigality of human life! "A certain amount of heat beyond what is usual at present might also be going to waste, if meal-times were secured in these cases, but it seems likely not equal in money-value to the waste of animal power now going on in glass-houses throughout the kingdom from growing boys not having enough quiet time to eat their meals at ease, with a little rest afterwards for digestion." (1. Now if, in consequence of such a rise or fall in the value of gold, the sum of the prices of commodities fall or rise, the quantity of money in currency must fall or rise to the same extent. This act produces no increase of exchange-value either for the one or the other; for each of them already possessed, before 1 "L'echange est une transaction admirable dans laquelle les deux contractants gagnent— toujours (!)" (Destutt de Tracy: "Traite de la Vo- lonte et de ses effets." Paris, 1826, p. . 444 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION in the United States, and with it the African slave trade, but also made the breeding of slaves the chief business of the border slave- states. Property, because each disposes only of what is his own. Although invisible, the value of iron, linen and corn has actual existence in these very articles: it is ideally made perceptible by their equality with gold, a relation that, so to say, exists only in their own heads. It is evident that the whole gist of this argument lies in the words "and so on," which send us from pillar to post. We see here, on the one hand, how the exchange of commodi- ties breaks through all local and personal bounds inseparable from direct barter, and develops the circulation of the products of social labour; and on the other hand, how it develops a whole network of social relations spontaneous in their growth and entire- ly beyond the control of the actors. . 1 "If a man can bring to London an ounce of Silver out of the Earth in Peru, in the same time that he can produce a bushelof Corn, then the one is the natural price of the other; now, if by reason of new or more easie mines a man can procure two ounces of silver as easily as he formerly did one, the corn will be as cheap at ten shillings the bushel as it was before at five shillings, ceteris paribus." William Petty. Modern Industry rent the veil that concealed from men their own social process of pro- duction, and that turned the various, spontaneously divided branches of production into so many riddles, not only to outsid- ers, but even to the initiated. Thus the nation has been abused, and made to pay for the twisting of straw for asses to eat. But no, he becomes importunate. What opinion should we have of a chemist, who, instead of studying the actual laws of the molecular changes inthe composition and decomposition of matter, and on that foundation solving definite problems, EXCHANGE 85 persons exist for one another merely as representatives of, and, therefore, as owners of, commodities. The means of production are at once changed into means for the absorp- tion of the labour of others. Of the hour and a half for meal-times, "one hour thereof at the least shall be given before three of the clock in the afternoon. It has existed for three generations of the English race, and I believe I may safely say that during that period it has destroyed nine generations of factory operatives." 2 No doubt in certain epochs of feverish activity the labour- market shows significant gaps. although in practice this profit is immediately turned into capital, and set in motion with the original." (F. Empl. It becomes the commodity that is the universal subject-matter of all con- tracts. In the older countries, machinery, when employed in some branches of industry, creates such a redundancy of labour in other branches that in these latter the fall of wages below the value of labour-power impedes the use of machinery, and, from the stand- point of the capitalist, whose profit comes, not from a diminution of the labour employed, but of the labour paid for, renders that use superfluous and often impossible. The machine, which is the starting-point of the industrial revolution, supersedes the workman, who handles a single tool, by a mechanism operating with a number of similar tools, and set in motion by a single motive power, whatever the form of that power may be. These obstructions are vanishing day by day. 7, 8.) 4 Strictly, Aristotle's definition is that man is by nature a town-cit- izen. And how does he fare in the mill? 2 .... Raw material may either form the principal substance of a product, or it may enter into its formation only as an access sory. By doing this we shall, at the same time, solve the riddle presented by money. The second term of its first metamorphosis, C — M, the money-form, then becomes the first term of its final metamorphosis, M — C, its re-conversion into the Bible. vi.) "The little masters generally have very irregular hours. 7d., kid-glovers 2s. B. Such cruel talk about "idleness and vice" ought to be branded as the purest cant, and the most shameless hypocrisy.... Thousands of hands were suddenly required in these places, remote from towns; and Lancashire, in particular, being, till then, compara- tively thinly populated and barren, a population was all that she now wanted. 1846. I have in many former reports shown ... And this one historical condition comprises a world's history. Captain Parry says of the inhabitants on the west coast of Baffin's Bay: "In this case (he refers to barter) they licked it (the thing represented to them) twice to their tongues, after which they seemed to consider the bargain satisfac- torily concluded." In the same way, the Eastern Esquimaux licked the articles they received in exchange. Let us consider, on the other hand, the capitalist. Value Export- ed, 1860. And first, of those that ye thinke should have no losse thereby? 2 But for all that, capi- tal never becomes reconciled to such changes — and this is ad- mitted over and over again by its own representatives — except "under the pressure of a General Act of Parliament" 3 for the com- pulsory regulation of the hours of labour. Apart from violent conflicts as to the rate of wages (and Adam Smith has already shown that in such a conflict, taken on the whole, the master is always master), a rise in the price of labour resulting from accumulation of capi- tal implies the following alternative: Either the price of labour keeps on rising, because its rise does not interfere with the progress of accumulation. VII. Laing, 1. 2 Though a use-value, in the form of a product, issues from the labour-process, yet other use-values, products of previous labour, enter into it as means of production. This is a far more im- portant experiment than was the plague in the middle of the 14th century so belauded of Malthusians. 2 It was partly the want of streams with a good fall on them, and partly their battles with superabundance of water in other respects, that compelled the Dutch to resort to wind as a motive power. The young servant girls in the houses of the London lower middle class are in common parlance called "slaveys." 1 Ganilh, on the contrary, considers the final result of the factory system to be an absolutely less number of operatives, at whose expense an increased number of "gens honnetes" live and develop their well-known "perfectibilite perfectible." Little as he understands the movement of production, at least he feels, that machinery must needs be a very fatal institution, if its introduc- tion converts busy workmen into paupers, and its development calls more slaves of labour into existence than it has suppressed. THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 679 the two other classes," x whilst "the amount of labour required from an ordinary convict under penal servitude is about one half of what would be done by an ordinary day-labourer." 2 A few char- acteristic depositions of witnesses: John Smith, governor of the Edinburgh prison, deposes: No. 5056. This had naturally to be determined otherwise than by its own compensating variations. The same quantity, 1 shilling or 2 hours, is added in one case and subtracted in the other. 217, sq.) What, "the courts say," I will illustrate by two examples. The wear and tear of all instruments, their daily loss of use-value, and the corresponding quantity of value they part with to the product, are accordingly calculated upon this basis. Those agents sent to the southern downs of England, to the pastures of Dorsetshire, to the glades of Devonshire, to the people tending kine in Wiltshire, but they sought in vain. Will. The over- production of sewing-machines themselves, causes their pro- ducers, in bad want of a sale, to let them out for so much a week, thus crushing by their deadly competition the small owners of 1 "The rental of premises required or workrooms seems the element which ultimately determines the point; and consequently it is in the met- ropolis, that the old system of giving work out to small employers and fami- lies has been longest retained, and earliest returned to." (1. Deviations would occur 1 "Unquestionably, there is a good deal of difference between the value of one man's labour and that of another from strength, dexterity, and honest application. 1 cellar 8 persons Acre Street . The material of variable capi- tal, i.e., the mass of the means of subsistence it represents for the labourer, or the so-called labour-fund, was fabled as a sepa- rate part of social wealth, fixed by natural laws and unchangeable. It develops, along with the qualitative sub-division of the social labour-proc- ess, a quantitative rule and proportionality for that process. 2 S. It will be seen later 1 how the school of Ricardo has come to grief over this stumbling-block. It is not our intention to consider, here, the way in which the laws, immanent in capitalist production, manifest themselves in the movements of individual masses of capital, where they assert themselves as coercive laws of competition, and are brought home to the mind and consciousness of the individual capitalist as the di- recting motives of his operations. Persons. There is no longer any need for this equation to figure as a link in the chain of equations that express the values of all other commodities, because the equivalent commodity, gold, now has the character of money. This category numbered, in 1851, 216,851 persons; in 1861, only 176,151. by ten prosecutions in seven magisterial divisions, and having been supported by the magistrates in one case only. But it is clear that according to the length of the working-day, that is, according to the amount of actual labour daily supplied, the same daily or weekly wage may represent very different prices of labour, i.e., very different sums of 1 The value of money itsell is here always supposed constant. What, however, characterises him as the political economist par excellence of the period of Manufacture, is the stress he lays on division of labour. I have heard on good au- 1 thority of a cloth weighing 8 lbs. In any given branch of industry cen- tralisation would reach its extreme limit if all the individual capitals invested in it were fused into a single capital. 1 the Factory Act of 1850 now in force (1867) allows for the average working-day 10 hours, i.e., for the first 5 days 12 hours from 6 a. In this roundabout way, then, the fact is expressed, that weaving also, in so far as it weaves value, has nothing to distinguish it from tailoring, and, conse- quently, is abstract human labour. The weekly cost of food per adult, gave the following average figures; silk-weavers 2s. No boots can be made without leather. Paris, t. As to the extent of the stoppage, it appears from authentic esti- mates, that in October 1862, 60.3% of the spindles, and 58% of the looms were standing. They cook for them the first simple food at hand; they also give them the lower part of the papyrus stem to eat, so far as it can be roasted in the fire, and the roots and stalks of marsh plants, some raw, some boiled and roasted. J. Its value is expressed only ideally in its price, by which it is equated to its opponent, the gold, as to the real em- bodiment of its value. If the merchant were made to pay the price of the coinage, he would not have sent his silver to the Tower without consideration; and coined money would always keep a value above uncoined silver." (North, 1. The work of supervision becomes their established and exclusive function. In Dublin, the master bakers have of- fered the most determined opposition to the movement, and by dis- countenancing as much as possible the journeymen promoting it, have succeeded in leading the men into acquiescence in Sun- day work and night-work, contrary to the convictions of the men." 1 The Committee of the English Government, which Govern- ment, in Ireland, is armed to the teeth, and generally knows how to show it, remonstrates in mild, though funeral, tones with the implacable master bakers of Dublin, Limerick, Cork, &c. . II., pp. Immense tracts of land, much of which is described in the statistical account of Scotland as having a pasturage in richness and extent of very superior description, are thus shut out from all cultivation and improvement, and are solely devoted to the sport of a few persons for a very brief period of the year." The London Economist of June 2, 1866, says, "Amongst the items of news in a Scotch paper of last week, we read... The French edition of Cantillon professes in its title to be a translation from the English, but the English edition: "The Analysis of Trade, Commerce, etc., by Philip Cantil- lon, late of the city of London, Merchant," is not only of later date (1759), but proves by its contents that it is a later and revised edition: e.g., in the 556 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION Piece-wage is finally one of the chief supports of the hour-system described in the preceding chapter. The buckets work alternately; when money is scarce, bullion is coined; when bullion is scarce, money is melted." (Sir D. 77. That form consequently makes it indispu- tably evident that in the world of commodities the character possessed by all labour of being human labour constitutes its specific social character. But the proportional change of magnitude is different in each case. 17, 14.) 2 To one of these gentlemen the taste of his rent was so grateful that he indignantly declared to the Commission of Inquiry that the whole hubbub was only due to the name of the system. m. Thus many labourers were compelled to seek shelter in villages and towns. Now they give him a thirteenth shilling a week for lodging, that he must find far away in au open village. This same Scotch sycophant and fine talker, Macaulay, says: "We hear to-day only of retrogression and see only progress." What eyes, and especially what ears! 1 Among the accusers of the workpeople, the most angry is the anony- mous author quoted in the text of "An Essay on Trade and Commerce, con- taining Observations on Taxes, &c," London, 1770. "The plough, the yoke, were 'the in- vention of gods, and the occupation of heroes;' are the loom, the spindle, the distaff, of less noble parentage. On looking closer it will be seen that this sum repre- sented part of the carpets produced in a year by the 50 discharged men, which part they received as wages from their employer in money instead of in kind. 3 "What a progress," since 1770! Macaulay would shout with exultation! The "House of Terror" for paupers of which the capitalistic soul of 1770 only dreamed, was realised a few years later in the shape of a gigantic "Workhouse" for the industrial worker him- self. And as i'appetit vient en mangeant, Rentroll's eyes will soon discover that Ireland, with 3y millions, is still always miserable, and mis- erable because she is over-populated. In other words, the production of luxu- ries increases. * Instruments of labour not only supply a standard of the degree of development to which human labour has attained, but they are also indicators of the social conditions under which that labour is carried on. Mais dans l'ordre social, la richesse a acquis la propriete de se reproduire par le travail d'autrui, et sans que son proprietaire y concoure. An artificer, who performs one after another the various frac- tional operations in the production of a finished article, must at one time change his place, at another his tools. This repeated change of place of the same pieces of money corresponds to the double change in form of the commodities, to their motion in opposite directions through two stages of circulation, and to the inter- lacing of the metamorphoses of different commodities. Beyond this, his necessary labour-time, the labourer, we saw, could continue to work for 2, 3, 4, 6, &c, hours. 2 1 1. . The latter stuck on to pure monetary relations the labels supplied by feudal law. The relative form of the value of the linen pre-supposes, therefore, the presence of some other commodity— here the coat- under the form of an equivalent. * In the first place then we equate the constant capital to zero. 3 So also is the establishment of socially-recognised 1 Karl Marx, "Zur Kritik der Politischen Oekonomie." Berlin, 1859, p. c, p. The automaton, as capital, and because it is capital, is endowed, in the person of the capitalist, with intelligence and will; it is therefore animat- ed by the longing to reduce to a minimum the resistance offered by that repellent yet elastic natural barrier, man. . How can this purely formal distinction between these processes change their character as it were by magic? He then lies down upon the kneading- board, which is also the covering of the trough in which 1 The French chemist, Chevallier, in his treatise on the "sophistica- tions" of commodities, enumerates for many of the 600 or more articles which he passes in review, 10, 20, 30 different methods of adulteration. In consequence of this defect, small-pox has been raging for some time, and some deaths [amongst the troglodytes] have been caused by it. 8 "Rep. The distinction between principal sub- stance and accessory vanishes in the true chemical industries, be- cause there none of the raw material re-appears, in its original composition, in the substance of the product. I hope I have said enough to make it appear that the moderate labour of six days in a week is no slavery. Sanderson have something else to make besides steel. Here, the whole process, which, when carried on as Manufacture, was split up into, and carried out by, a series of operations, is completed by a single machine, working a combination of va- rious tools. Parte Moderna t. 19. 4 qs. 1 The word pound, for instance, was the money-name given to an actual pound weight of silver. . Its discovery, while removing all appearance of mere accidentality from the determination of the magnitude of the values of products, yet in no way alters the mode in which that determination takes place. 3 "For a great part of the time," says Mr. Howell, "owing to the depression of trade, many factories were altogether closed, and a still greater number were working short time. * A single machine, when it takes the place of co-operation or of manufacture, may itself serve as the basis of an industry of a handicraft character. We therefore find that speculators make it a rule when such sudden changes in value 210 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION occur, to speculate in that material on which the least possible quantity of labour has been spent: to speculate, therefore, in yarn rather than in cloth, in cotton itself, rather than in yarn. 1 b. Like the royal navy, the factories were recruited by means of the press-gang. It is quite permissible tor our purpose to assume, that the labour expended on the repairs of instruments is included in the labour necessary for their original production. In Egypt, on the contrary, every artificer is severely punished if he meddles with affairs of State, or carries on several trades at once. 2 "Desire implies want; it is the appetite of the mind, and as natural as hunger to the body.... If he [Ricardo] allowed that when A rises in value relatively to B, B falls in value relatively to A, he cut away the ground on which he rested his grand propo- sition, that the value of a commodity is ever determined by the labour em- bodied in it; for if a change in the cost of A alters not only its own value in relation to B, for which it is exchanged, but also the value of B relatively to that of A, though no change has taken place in the quantity of labour to produce B, then not only the doctrine falls to the ground which asserts that the quantity of labour bestowed on an article regulates its value, but also that which affirms the cost of an article to regulate its value." (J Broadhurst: "Political Economy," London, 1842, pp. . Hume); because he told the world how "Hume amused him- self on his deathbed with Lucian and Whist," and because be even had the impudence to write of Hume: "I have always considered him both in his life-time and since his death, as approaching as nearly to the idea of a per- fectly wise and virtuous man, as, perhaps, the nature of human frailty will permit." The bishop cries out, in a passion: "Is it right in you. And how do we measure the quantity of this value? But the accumulation of capital pre- supposes surplus-value; surplus-value pre-supposes capitalistic production; capitalistic production pre-supposes the pre-exist- ence of considerable masses of capital and of labour-power in the hands of producers of commodities. The crea- tion of a normal working-day is, therefore, the product of a pro- tracted civil war, more or less dissembled, between the capitalist class and the working-class. In the history of primitive accumulation, all revolutions are epoch-making that act as levers for the capitalist class in course of formation; but, above all, those moments when great masses of men are suddenly and forcibly torn from their means of sub- sistence, and hurled as free and "unattached" proletarians on the labour-market. 516 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION cause that determines the magnitude of that value. 4 1. 3 The revolution effect- ed by machinery in the juridical relations between the buyer and the seller of labour-power, causing the transaction as a whole to lose the appearance of a contract between free persons, afforded the English Parliament an excuse, founded on juridical principles, for the interference of the state with factories. In this case, it is as if the spinner had spun 4 lbs. s. His report is incorporated with the "Sixth Report on Public Health. But the precious metals at the sources of their production are directly exchanged for other commodities. To discover the various uses of things is the work of history. c, pp. as to the men, to outdoor labour on public works." ("Rep. 352 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION difference which, when different communities come in contact, calls forth the mutual exchange of products, and the consequent gradual conversion of those products into commodities. , one, two, or three years, it may be, will produce the quan- tity.... But its total amount varies with the du- ration of the surplus-labour. Its outbreak in 1866 was signalised by the failure of a gigantic London Bank, immediately followed by the collapse of countless swindling companies. The whole mystery of commodities, all the magic and necromancy that surrounds the products of labour as long as they take the form of commodities, vanishes therefore, so soon as we come to other forms of production. The useful qualities that labour-power possesses, and by virtue of which it makes yarn or boots, were to him nothing more than a conditio sine qua non; for in order to create value, labour must be expended in a useful manner. Here the political economist thinks he sees the 1 Economist, Jan. Even the short sleep is obviously liable to be broken by a boy having to wake himself if it is night, or by the noise, if it is day." Mr. White gives cases where a boy worked 36 consecutive hours; others where boys of 12 drudged on until 2 in the morning, and then slept in the works till 5 a. That mankind in general, are naturally inclined to ease and indolence, we fatally experience to be true, from the conduct of our manufacturing populace, who do not labour, upon an average, above four days in a week, unless provisions happen to be very dear Put all the necessaries of the poor under one denomination; for instance, call them all wheat, or suppose that. Had we gone further, and inquired under what cir- cumstances all, or even the majority of products take the form of commodities, we should have found that this can only happen with production of a very specific kind, capitalist production. MONEY, OR THE CIRCULAT ION OP COMMODITIES 99 A general rise in the prices of commodities can result only, either from a rise in their values— the value of money remaining constant— or from a fall in the value of money, the values of commodities remaining constant. He employs one portion of these lly hours, in produc- ing or replacing his wages, and the remaining portion in produc- ing your net profit. The vendor becomes a cred- itor, the purchaser becomes a debtor. We know, moreover, that this reduction is no mere scientific process. EXPROPRIATION OF AGRICULTURAL POPULATION 719 sheep-walks was, therefore, its cry. as being the product of one hour, the labourer receives for them a price of 3d. £7 90 Tithes, Rates, and Taxes, £1 1 Rent 18 Farmer's Profit and In- terest 12 Total, £ 3 11 Assuming that the price of the product is the same as its value, we here find the surplus-value distributed under the va- rious heads of profit, interest, rent, &c. Silk weaving: 1851, 111,940: 1861, 101,678. This qualitative change in mechanical industry continually discharges hands from the factory, or shuts its doors against the fresh stream of recruits, while the purely quantitative extension of the factories absorbs not only the men thrown out of work, but also fresh contin- gents. 1 Thus we may say that surplus-value rests on a natural basis;, but this is permissible only in the very general sense, that there is no natural obstacle absolutely preventing one man from dis- burdening himself of the labour requisite for his own existence,, and burdening another with it, any more, for instance, than unconquerable natural obstacles prevent one man from eating 1 "The very existence o\ the master-capitalists, as a distinct class, is dependent on the productiveness of industry." (Ramsay, 1. They may vary either in the same or in different degrees, in the same or in opposite 1 "The amount of labour which a man had undergone in the course of 24 hours might be approximately arrived at by an examination of the chemi- cal changes which had taken place in his body, changed forms in matter indi- cating the anterior exercise of dynamic force." (Grove: "On the Correlation of Physical Forces.") 528 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION directions, with the result that the variations counteract one another, either wholly or in part. Morning Star, April 17th. 1 MacCulloch took out a patent for "wages of past labour," long before .Senior did for "wages of abstinence." CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO CAPITAL 609 SECTION 5.— THE SO-CALLED LABOUR-FUND It has been shown in the course of this inquiry that capital is not a fixed magnitude, but is a part of social wealth, elastic and constantly fluctuating with the division of fresh surplus-value into revenue and additional capital. c, p. Therefore, when we say that a commodity is in the equivalent form, we express the fact that it is directly ex- changeable with other commodities. He then continues: "Some time... Its Report, in 1842, unfolded, in the words of Nassau W. 2 1 "Corn and labour rarely march quite abreast; but there is an obvious limit, beyond which they cannot be separated. 70, 71.) 186 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION SECTION 2.— THE PRODUCTION OF SURPLUS-VALUE The product appropriated by the capitalist is a use-value, as yarn, for example, or boots. The truth is that he performs no such miracle. The capitalist, on the other hand, who makes him do, besides these 8 hours, say 4 hours' surplus-labour, requires an addi- tional sum of money for furnishing the additional means of produc- tion. By the purchase of labour-power, the cap- italist incorporates labour, as a living ferment, with the lifeless constituents of the product. xxxviii., n. Of the same nature are the statute of Charles V. I continue, how- ever, to receive about the usual number of complaints that half, or three-quarters of an hour in the day, are snatched from the workers by encroaching upon the times professedly allowed for rest and refreshment." 4 The same phenomenon was reproduced on a smaller scale during the frightful cotton-crisis from 1861 to 1865. But I do not need to go further than to the window of the room in which I am writing, to see at al- most any time, treatment of cattle that would ensure the immediate dis- charge of the driver by almost any farmer owning them in the North." 1 The distinction between skilled and unskilled labour rests in part on pure illusion, or, to say the least, on distinctions that have long since ceased ot be real, and that survive only by virtue of a traditional convention; in 198 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION But on the other hand, in every process of creating value, the reduction of skilled labour to average social labour, e.g., one day of skilled to six days of unskilled labour, is unavoid- able. Aft- er the repeal of the Corn Laws, from 1846 to 1863, there are 8 years of moderate activity and prosperity against 9 years of depression and stagnation. In all of these formulae (II.), the actual degree of exploita- tion of labour, or the rate of surplus-value, is falsely expressed. . They are, therefore, at the same time methods of the production of capital by capital, or methods of its accelerated accumulation. But he sees really only the local oscillation of the labour-market in a particular sphere of production— he sees only the phenomena accompanying the distribution of the working population into the different spheres of outlay of capital, according to its varying needs. 1.484 Post Office Orders, . 54.— F. On the other hand, there is a continual flowing back- wards and forwards of gold and silver between the different nation- al spheres of circulation, a current whose motion depends on the ceaseless fluctuations in the course of exchange. 20 yards of linen =20 yards of linen is no ex- pression of value. 2 It is one of the greatest merits of Ricardo to have seen in machinery not only the means of producing commodities, but of creating a "redundant population.** 408 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION of capital. Generally speaking, the specifically capitalist mode of production ceases to be a mere means of producing relative sur- plus-value, so soon as that mode has conquered an entire branch of production; and still more so, so soon as it has conquered all the important branches. From this fact West and Ricardo drew the conclusion, that the diminu- tion in the productiveness of agricultural labour had brought about a fall in the rate of surplus-value, and they made this assumption of a fact that existed only in their imaginations, the starting-point of important investigations into the relative mag- nitudes of wage.-, profits, and rent. In the same way the exchange-values of commodities must be capable of being expressed in terms of something common to them all, of which thing they represent a greater or less quantity. Classical economy never arrived at a consciousness of the results of its own analysis; it accepted un- critically the categories "value of labour," "natural price of labour, " &c, as final and as adequate expressions for the value-relation un- der consideration, and was thus led, as will be seen later, into inextricable confusion and contradiction, while it offered to the vulgar economists a secure basis of operations for their shallow^ ness, which on principle worships appearances only. For instance, down to 1815, the emigration of mechanics employed in machine making was, in England, forbidden, under grievous pains and penalties. 2 Of all the animals kept by the farmer, the labourer, the instru- mentum vocale, was, thenceforth, the most oppressed, the worst nourished, the most brutally treated. This augmentation of surplus-value is pocketed by him, whether his commodities belong or not to the class of necessary means of subsistence that participate in determining the general value of labour-power. of Fact, for 31st Oct., 1862," p. . "By the infirmity of human nature," says friend Ure, "it happens that the more skilful the workman, the more self-willed and intractable he is apt to become, and of course the less fit a component of a mechanical system in which... in 1815, the labour of following a pair of mules spinning cotton of No. 40— reckoning 12 hours to the working-day — involved a necessity of walking 8 miles. Suppose, in consequence of the increased dearness of the products of the soil, that, the value of labour-power rises from 3 shillings to 4, and therefore the necessary labour-time from 6 hours to 8. 461,554 . 612 CHAPTER XXV THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION SECTIONl .—THE INCREASED DEMAND FOR LABOUR-POWER THAT ACCOMPANIES ACCUMULATION, THE COMPOSITION OF CAPITAL REMAINING THE SAME In this chapter we consider the influence of the growth of capital on the lot of the labouring class. We proceed upon the assumption that spinning is simple, unskilled labour, the average labour of a given state of society. * The shortening of the hours of labour creates, to begin with, the subjective conditions for the condensation of labour, by enabling the workman to exert more strength in a given time. And thereby Paul, just as he stands in his Pauline personality, becomes to Peter the type of the genus homo. I therefore call it the variable part of capital, or, shortly, variable capital. G. Gen- erally speaking, the mode of producing relative surplus-value consists in raising the productive power of the workman, so as to enable him to produce more in a given time with the same ex- penditure of labour. c. yields a surplus-value of 150s. In the second place, a change in the value of gold does not interfere with its functions as a measure of value. Such productive consumption is distinguished from indi- vidual consumption by this, that the latter uses up products, as means of subsistence for the living individual; the former, as means whereby alone, labour, the labour-power of the living individual, is enabled to act. 446 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION "navvies," more or less permanently employed, and the whole administrative and commercial staff, make up about 28,000. relating to Transportation and Penal Servitude," Lond., 1863, pp. The constantly increasing amount of capital invested in sewing- machines, 4 gives the spur to the production of, and gluts the markets with, machine-made articles, thereby giving the signal to the domestic workers for the sale of their machines. It is this, chiefly, which explains why the population of Egypt is so numerous, and, therefore, why so many great works can be undertaken." ' Never- theless the grand structures of ancient Egypt are less due to the extent of its population than to the large proportion of it that was freely disposable. Chamberlain, Mayor of the town, now (1883) President of the Board of Trade. Even the mild, Free- trade, vulgar economist, Molinari, says: "Dans les colonies ou 1'esclavage a ete aboli sans que le travail force se trouvait remplace par une quantite equi- valente de travail libre, on a vu s'operer la contre-partfe du fait qui se realise tous les jours sous nos yeux. In free coun- tries, they mostly frequent the assemblies of the people.... Manufactures, accordingly, prosper most where the mind is least consulted, and where the workshop may ... * The Irish famine of 1846 killed more than 1,000,000 people, but it killed poor devils only. Further suppose that the raw material annual- ly consumed costs £3,000, both before and after the change. D. London, 1863, p. 1 Between 1852 and 1862, considerable extension of the English woollen manufacture took place, while the number of hands employed in it remained almost stationary, showing how greatly the introduc- tion of new machines had superseded the labour of preceding periods. . They work for the same number of 1 And now forsooth children are employed at file-cutting in Sheffield. Further, it will generally be found that the wages of these men bear a certain pro- portion to the price of the necessary means of subsistence, so that a man with two children is able to bring up his family without re- course to parish relief." 1 Malthus at that time remarked with reference to the facts published by Parliament: "I confess that I see, with misgiving, the great extension of the practice of piece- wage. This change takes place spon- taneously. &c, 30th April, 1860, p. The motive mechanism grows with the number of the machines that are turned simultaneously, and the transmitting mechanism becomes a wide-spreading apparatus. The mother and one child were down with typhus when Dr. Hunter was called in. Dr. Boothroyd, a medical practitioner at Hanley, says: "Each successive generation of potters is more dwarfed and less robust than the preceding one." In like man- ner another doctor, Mr. M'Bean: "Since he began to practise among the potters 25 years ago, he had observed a marked de- generation especially shown in diminution of stature and breadth." These statements are taken from the report of Dr. Greenhow in I860. At breakfast time, 10 After 2 p. 14, I make the following remark on this point — "It is not difficult to understand what 'service' the category 'service' must render to a class of economists like J. 1 1 Taking the usurer, that old-fashioned but ever renewed specimen of the capitalist for his text, Luther shows very aptly that the love of power is an element in the desire to get rich. 22 and 23.) 199 CHAPTER VIII CONSTANT CAPITAL AND VARIABLE CAPITAL The various factors of the labour-process play different parts in forming the value of the product. The whole farce is too characteristic of the spirit of capital, not to call for a few extracts from this Report. But Ricardo reads him as if he had said, that labour (not the value of labour) is embodied both in use-value and exchange-value. It tells us that in two different things — in 1 quarter of corn and x cwt. This, however, demands for society a certain material ground-work or set of conditions of existence which in their turn are the sponta- neous product of a long and painful process of development. Again, in proportion to the increasing mass of the means of production, now no longer the property of the labourer, but of the capitalist, the necessity increases for some effective control over the proper application of those means. 36.) 3 Senior, I. Being limited by the physical properties of the commodity, it has no existence apart from that commodity. of the manufacturer are doubled by improvement in machinery ... Scotland Ireland 1858 . Concerning the half-dozen petitions in which workpeople were made to complain of "their oppression by the Act," the petitioners themselves declared under oral examina- tion, that their signatures had been extorted from them. Though the method is so simple, yet it may not be amiss, by means of a few examples, to exercise the reader in the applica- tion of the novel principles underlying it. (David Urquhart, 1. c. On the other hand: Cotton-spinning and weaving: 1851, 371,777: 1861, 456,646. His answer is sim- ply childish. We know, however, from what has gone before, that the labour-process may continue beyond the time necessary to re- produce and incorporate in the product a mere equivalent for the value of the labour-power. — 'Avdfxr). 3 From the reports of the last Parliamentary Commission on adulter- ation of means of subsistence, it will be seen that the adulteration even of medicines is the rule, not the exception in England. For the conversion of his money into capital, therefore, the owner of money must meet in the market with the free labourer, free in the double sense, that as a free man he can dispose of his labour-power as his own commodity, and that on the other hand he has no other commodity for sale, is short of everything neces- sary for the realisation of his labour-power. x Thus, for instance, in the appendix of my last annu- al report, Dr. Ord, reporting on an outbreak of fever at Wing, in Buckinghamshire, mentions how a young man who had come thither from Wingrave with fever, "in the first days of his illness slept in a room with nine other persons. 3 At the end of the 18th and during the first ten years of the 19th century, the English farmers and landlords enforced the absolute minimum of wage, by paying the agricultural labour- ers less than the minimum in the form of wages, and the remainder in the shape of parochial relief. taken as typical we have cal- culated all possible resources. This does not prevent him from calling upon the factory operatives to thank Providence, who by means of machinery has given them the leisure to think of their "immor- tal interests." 2 1 Ure, 1. His means of consumption, "in that case, are the mere means of con- sumption required by a means of production; his individual con- sumption is directly productive consumption. of gold; commodity A=an aliquot part of the total commodity =the same aliquot part of x cwt. 2 Number of persons of all ages employed in the respective industries. . 6d., or 3s. .a crop of pota- toes. In both cases, it is, so to say, the special business of each single commodity to find an expression for its value, and this it does without the help of the others. 469.) With increase of capital, "the demand [for labour] will be in a diminishing ratio." (ibid. "Textbook of Lectures," &c, pp. Another company which returns £190,000 i9 finally compelled to admit that the true return should be £250,000." (Ibid., p 42.) 650 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION the result that from 1851 to 1861 the number of farms of less than 100 acres had fallen from 31,583 to 26,597, so that 5,016 had been thrown together into larger farms. Piece-workers are in fact their own masters, even whilst working upon the capital of the employer." (John Watts: "Trade Societies and Strikes, Machinery and Co-operative Societies." Manchester, 1865, pp. For the rest, it requires but a slight acquaintance with the history of the Roman republic, for example, to be aware that its secret history is the history of its landed property. Then comes again the time, when the supply of labour is less than the demand, wages rise, and so on. Their pauperism is ultimately a motive to their eviction and the chief source of their miserable housing which breaks down their last power of resistance, and makes them mere slaves of the land- ed proprietors and the farmers. Similar laws in France, where by the middle of the 17th century a kingdom of vagabonds (truands) was established in 1 Thomas More says in his "Utopia": "Therfore that on covetous and unsatiable cormaraunte and very plage of his native contrey maye compasse aboute and inclose many thousand akers of grounde together within one pale or hedge, the husbandmen be thrust owte of their owne, or els either by co- ney ne and fraude, or by violent oppression they be put besydes it, or by wrongs and iniuries thei be so weried that they be compelled to sell all: by one meanes, therfore, or by other, either by hooke or crooke they muste needes de- parte awaye, poore, selye, wretched soules, men, women, husbands, wiues, fatherlesse children, widowes, wofull mothers with their yonge babes, and their whole household smal in substance, and muche in numbre, as husband- rye requireth many handes. Thus social power becomes the private power of private persons. Reponse a la Philosophic de la Misere par M. (n. . Ed. 1821, pp. The same elements of capital which, from the point of view of the labour-process, present themselves respectively as the objective and subjective factors, as means of production and labour-power, present themselves, from the point of view of the process of creating surplus-value, as constant and variable capital. On the other hand, when 3 years later, the cattle disease broke out, Parliament broke wildly through its usages and voted, straight off, millions for indemnifying the millionaire landlords, whose farmers in any event came off without loss, owing to the rise in the price of meat The bull- like bellow of the landed proprietors at the opening of Parliament, in 1866, showed that a man can worship the cow Sabala without being a Hindu, and can change himself into an ox without being a Jupiter. declares, that if "des ci- toyens attaches aux m ernes professions, arts et metiers prenaient des delibe- rations, faisaient entre eux des conventions tendantes a reiuser de concert ou a n'accorder qu'a un prix determine le secours de leur industrie ou de leurs travaux, les dites deliberations et conventions ... 2 "To subdivide a man is to execute him, if he deserves the sentence, to assassinate him if he does not. MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 397 tation, and the sordid trafficking needs of the parents. m. 2 Certain guardians of these laws are appointed, Factory Inspectors, directly under the Home Secretary, whose reports are published half-yearly, by order of Parliament. 25-27.) MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 445 The immediate result of machinery is to augment surplus- value and the mass of products in which surplus-value is em- bodied. c, p. An exposition of all these forms however, belongs to the special study of wage-labour, not therefore to this work. THEIR GENERAL EXTENSION IN ENGLAND Factory legislation, that first conscious and methodical re- action of society against the spontaneously developed form of the process of production, is, as we have seen, just as much the necessary product of modern industry as cotton yarn, self-actors, and the electric telegraph. The Poor Law and its administration were in 1795 and 1814 the same. It is solely by reason of this identity, that cotton planting, spindle making and spinning, are capable of forming the component parts, differing only quan- titatively from each other, of one whole, namely, the value of the yarn. The increase in the spindles was therefore 26.9% and in the looms 15.6%, while the number of the operatives decreased 7%. Since every commodity, on becoming money, disappears as a commodi- ty, it is impossible to tell from the money itself, how it got into the hands of its possessor, or what article has been changed into it. Nevertheless, with the fall in numbers of the population, rents and farmers' profits rose, although the latter not as steadily as the former. By this means he still squeezes an extra surplus-value of one penny out of each. The pretended Ten Hours' Act, was thus simple hum- bug, parliamentary cheating, had never existed! The Factory Inspectors urgently warned the Government that the antago- nism of classes had arrived at an incredible tension. 1 The State puts in circulation bits of paper on which their various denominations, say £1, £5, &c, are printed. 67.) 2 "In whatever proportion the expenses of a labourer are diminished, in the same proportion will his wages be diminished, if the restraints upon industry are at the same time taken off." ("Considerations Concerning Taking 320 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION The value of a commodity is, in itself, of no interest to the cap- italist. 1 "Toutes les productions d'un meme genre ne /orment proprement qu'une masse, dont le prix se determine en general et sans egard aux circon- stances particulieres." (Le Trosne, 1. But it has not the least idea, that when the difference between various kinds of labour is treated as purely quantitative, their qualitative unity or equality, and therefore their reduction to abstract human labour, is implied. Now, however much the use of machinery may increase the surplus-labour at the expense of the necessary labour by heighten- ing the productiveness of labour, it is clear that it attains this result, only by diminishing the number of workmen employed by a given amount of capital. of Fact, for 31st Oct., 1863," p. There middlemen receive the raw material from the capitalist en chef, and group around their sewing-machines, in "chambers" and "garrets," from 10 to 50 or more workwomen. COMMODITIES 63 a mirror of the linen's value. . Her cunning consists principally in her mediating activity, which, by causing objects to act and re-act on each other in accordance with their own nature, in this way, without any direct interference in the process, carries out reason's intentions." (He- gel: "Enzyklopadie, Erster Theil, Die Logik," Berlin, 1840, p 382.) 2 In his otherwise miserable work ("Theorie de l'Econ. 2 From the law: "the price of labour being given, the daily or weekly wage depends on the quantity of labour expended," it follows, first of all, that, the lower the price of labour, the greater must be the quantity of labour, or the longer must be the working- day for the labourer to secure even a miserable average wage. Whilst the Liberal press asked how the fine gentlemen and ladies, and the well-paid clergy of the State Church, with whom Lincolnshire swarms, could allow such a system to arise on their es- tates, under their very eyes, they who send out expressly missions to the Antipodes, "for the improvement of the morals of South Sea Islanders" — the THE GENERAL LAW OP CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 697 (f.) Ireland In concluding this section, we must travel for a moment to Ireland. . But that process must have had a beginning of some kind. SECTION 5.— THE CAPITALISTIC CHARACTER OF MANUFACTURE An increased number of labourers under the control of one capitalist is the natural starting-point, as well of co-operation generally, as of manufacture in particular. On this there are not two opin- ions, even among the bourgeois economists. The use-value which the former gets in exchange, manifests itself only in the actual usufruct, in the consumption of the labour- power. Who will look after the young children? The illusion begotten by the intervention of money vanishes immediately, if, instead of taking a single capitalist and a single labourer, we take the class of capi- talists and the class of labourers as a whole. 6, 9, 22, 25, etc. 3 In Asia, on the other hand, the fact that state taxes are chiefly composed of rents payable in kind, 1 As an example of how little ready money is required in true commer- cial operations, I give below a statement by one of the largest London houses of its yearly receipts and payments. After the lapse of a certain num- ber of years, the capital value he then possesses is equal to the sum total of the surplus-value appropriated by him during those years, and the total value he has consumed is equal to that of his original capital. Sawyers: 1851, 30,552: 1861,31,647— a small rise in consequence of the increase of sawing-machines. Manufacture proper not only subjects the previously in- dependent workman to the discipline and command of capital, but, in addition, creates a hierarchic gradation of the workmen them- selves. On the basis of the production of commodities, where the means of production are the property of private persons, and where the artisan therefore either produces commodities, isolated from and independent of others, or sells his labour-power as a commodity, because he lacks the means for independent industry, co-operation on a large scale can realise itself only in the increase of individual capitals, only in proportion as the means of social production and the means of subsistence are transformed into the private property of capi- talists. But neither the quit-rent-corn nor the tithe-corn became commodities by reason of the fact that they had been produced for others. The first peculiarity that strikes us, in considering the form of the equivalent, is this: use-value becomes the form of manifes- tation, the phenomenal form of its opposite, value. . It allows males over 13 to be worked at will day and night. 2 "The Master Spinners' and Manufacturers' Defence Fund. In the ten years during which it regulated factory work, THE WORKING-DAY 281 first in part, and then entirely, the official reports of the factory inspectors teem with complaints as to the impossibility of putting the Act into force. But, even in that case, the latter would extend its limits. The same is the case with the steam-hammer mentioned above. Petty, who regarded the population as the basis of wealth, and was, like Adam Smith, an outspoken foe to parsons, says, as if he had a presenti- ment of their bungling interference, "that Religion best nourishes when the Priests are most mortified, as was before said of the Law, which best flour- isheth when lawyers have least to do." He advises the Protestant priests, there- fore, if they, once for all, will not follow the Apostle Paul and "mortify" them- selves by celibacy, "not to breed more Churchmen than the Benefices, as they now stand shared out, will receive, that is to say, if there be places for about twelve thousand in England and Wales, it will not be safe to breed up 24,000 ministers, for then the twelve thousand which are unprovided for, will seek ways how to get themselves a livelihood, which they cannot do more easily than by persuading the people that the twelve thousand incumbents do poison or starve their souls, and misguide them in their way to Heaven." (Petty; : 'A Treatise of Taxes and Contributions," London, 16G7, u 57.) Adam Smith's position with the Protestant priesthood of his time is shown by the following. Its functional existence absorbs, so to say, its material existence. 406-9, p. 11 oz.), and 3d. Empl. As early as 1696 John Bellers says: "For if one had a hundred thousand acres of land and as many pounds in money, and as many cattle, without a labourer, what would the rich man be, but a labourer? 1530: Beggars old and unable to work receive a beggar's licence. Temples with the ancients served as the dwellings of the gods of commodi- ties. THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 621 mulation, metamorphosed by economists into a pretended law of Nature, in reality merely states that the very nature of accumu- lation excludes every diminution in the degree of exploitation of labour, and every rise in the price of labour, which could se- riously imperil the continual reproduction, on an ever-enlarging scale, of the capitalistic relation. Edit. The price of labour, at the moment when demand and supply are in equilibrium, is its natural price, determined independently of the relation of demand and supply. 3 The question put by one of the Inquiry Commissioners, How the young persons are kept steadily to their work, is very correctly answered by Mr. Wm. Marshall, the general manager of a glass manufactory: "They cannot well neglect their work; when they once begin, they must go on; they are just the same as parts of a machine." ("Children's Empl. of Fact, for 30 April, 1863," pp. The use- value of 15 lbs. The fantastic notions about raising or lowering the mint -price of money by transferring to greater or smaller weights of gold or silver the names already legally appropriated to fixed weights of those metals; such notions, at least in those cases in which they aim, not at clumsy financial operations against creditors, both public and private, but at economic quack remedies, have been so exhaustively treated by Wm. Petty in his "Quantulumcunaue concerning money: To the Lord Marquis of Halifax, 1682," that even his immediate followers, Sir Dudley North and John Locke, not to mention later ones, could only dilute him. 1863, pp 63, 64, also the "Rep. . ... If we say that, as values, commodities are mere congelations of human labour, we reduce them by our analysis, it is true, to the abstraction, value; but we ascribe to this value no form apart from their bodily form. . But this unity of differences manifests itself at two opposite poles, and at each pole in an opposite way. or 3s. In tailoring, shirtmaking, shoemaking, &c, all the forms are intermingled. By the quantity of the labour contained in it. 630 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION to the reader. Therefore, piece- wage also varies, for it is the money expression of a determined working-time. 586.) "Then you have a very poor opinion of the integrity of mining engineers?" "It is most certainly unjust and inequitable." (n. As the contest takes place in the arena of modern industry, it first breaks out in the home of that indus- try — England. 2 Capital celebrated its orgies. It cannot be denied, in the above instance, that the machinery not only liberates 50 men, thus plac- ing them at others' disposal, but, at the same time, it withdraws from their consumption, and sets free, means of subsistence to the value of £1,500. Dividendosi in tal maniera per la comune e privata uti- lita gli uomini in varie classi e condizioni." (Cesare Beccaria: "Elementi di Econ. 3 "Public Health. 162 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION privilege of selling too dear. Fawcett: "The Economic Position of the British Labourer." Cam- bridge and London, 1865, p. Quand vous mettez un homme dans le vide, vous vous emparez de l'atmospbere. 826,783 . The provisions of the labour statutes as to contracts between master and workman, as to giving notice and the like, which only allow of a civil action against the contract-breaking master, but on the contrary permit a criminal action against the contract- breaking workman, are to this hour (1873) in full force. c, p. In the east of England thrives a beautiful fruit of this vicious circle — the so-called gang-system, to which I must briefly return here. Wherever the want of clothing forced them to it, the human race made clothes for thousands of years, without a single man becom- ing a tailor. The open vil- lages which supply the contingent of the gang, become Sodoms and Gomorrahs, 1 and have twice as high a rate of illegitimate births as the rest of the kingdom. If you compare it with the num- bers fed upon the farm, you will find that an estate in the Highlands main- tains, perhaps, ten times as many people as another of the same value in a good and fertile province." (1. In the course of this development, the formal subjection is replaced by the real subjection of labour to capital. 1 What strikes us, then, in the English legislation of 1867, is, on the one hand, the necessity imposed on the parliament of the ruling classes, of adopting in principle measures so extraor- dinary, and on so great a scale, against the excesses of capital- istic exploitation; and on the other hand, the hesitation, the repugnance, and the bad faith, with which it lent itself to the task of carrying those measures into practice. It has even considerably reduced the temperature of the stoves themselves with a considerable saving of fuel, and with a readier effect on the ware." 1 In spite of every prophecy, the cost-price of earthenware did not rise, but the quantity produced did, and to such an extent that the export for the twelve months, ending December, 1865, exceeded in value by £ 138,628 the average of the preceding three years. 15.) MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 451 rial and in the disposal of the produce. They develop at a much quicker rate, because mere accumulation, the absolute increase of the total social capital, is accompanied by the centralisation of the individual capitals of which that total is made up; and be- cause the change in the technological composition of the additional capital goes hand in hand with a similar change in the technologi- cal composition of the original capital. It is owing to the fact that the linen contains only half as much labour as the coat, and consequently, that in the production of the latter, labour-power must have been expended during twice the time necessary for the production of the former. The Mahometan rulers of India understood this better than their English successors. He there shows, amongst other things, how the monotonous and uselessly long school hours of the children of the upper and middle classes, uselessly add to the labour of the teacher, "while he not only fruitlessly but ab- solutely injuriously, wastes the time, health, and energy of the children." 3 From the Factory system budded, as Robert Owen 1 On the very advantageous results of combining gymnastics (and drilling in the case of boys) with compulsory education for factory children and pauper scholars, see the speech of N. c, p. 8 The Act allows children to be employed for 10 hours if they do not work day after day, but only on alternate days. They went through a course of teaching till they were finished printers. would be manifestly to their greater advantage All that time and strength wasted; all the suffering from extra and unprofitable fatigue produced to the labourer and to his children; every instance in which the par- ent may have traced the moral ruin of his child to the undermining of deli- cacy by the over-crowding of cottages, or to the contaminating influences of the public gang, must have been so many incentives to feelings in the minds of the labouring poor which can be well understood, and which it would be needless to particularise. c, t. Carey, theYan- kee, occasionally performs this conjuring trick with like success, even with the relations resulting from slavery. This distinction is self-evident. 474 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION machines. 3 This industrial revolution which takes place spontaneously, is artificially helped on by the extension of the Factory Acts to all industries in which women, young persons and children are employed. Lond., 1862.) 774 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION Australian labour-market," and prostitution in some places there flourishes as wantonly as in the London Haymarket. By converting part of his capital into labour-power, the capitalist augments the value of his entire capital. Hegel, "Philosophie des Rechts." Berlin, 1840. 207-210.) More! less! not sufficiently! so far! not altogether! What clearness and precision of ideas and language! And such eclectic professorial twaddle i is modestly baptised by Mr. Roscher, "the anatomico-physiological method!' of Political Economy! One discovery however, he must have credit for, Aamely, that money is "a pleasant commodity." EXCHANGE 93 in production assume a material character independent of their control and conscious individual action. In June, 1864, a man, his wife and 4 children lived in a cot (one-storied cottage). 1 As the chosen people bore in their features the sign manual of Jehovah, so division of labour brands the manufac- turing workman as the property of capital. The absolute limit of the average working-day — this being by nature always less than 24 hours— sets an absolute limit to the compensation of a reduction of variable capital by a higher rate of surplus-value, or of the decrease of the number of labourers exploited by a higher degree of exploitation of labour- power. c, pp. to 4 p. Ann Killin. The Act has improved the venti- lation very much." 2 At the same time, this portion of the Act 1 1. Is their black-market, their lash, and their barter of human flesh more detestable than this slow sacrifice of humanity which takes place in order that veils and collars may be fabricated for the benefit of capitalists?" 1 The potteries of Staffordshire have, during the last 22 years, been the subject of three parliamentary inquiries. the capitalist is then the owner not of the capital only" (he means the means of production) "but of the labour also. Very important materials for the fluctuation of wages during that period are to be found in the Blue books: "Report and Evidence from the Select Committee on Petitions respecting the Corn Laws" (Parliamentary Session of 1813-14), and "Report from the Lords' Committee, on the state of the Growth, Commerce, and Consumption of Grain, and all Laws relating thereto" (Session of 1814-15). In these cases the constant capital consists almost exclusively of instruments of labour, which can very well absorb an increased quantity of labour (day and night shifts of labourers, e.g.). We there saw how machinery, by annexing the labour of women and children, augments the number of hu- man beings who form the material for capitalistic exploitation, how it confiscates the whole of the workman's disposable time, by immoderate extension of the hours of labour, and how finally its progress, which allows of enormous increase of production in shorter and shorter periods, serves as a means of systematically getting more work done in a shorter time, or of exploiting labour- power more intensely. So also is it with the means of production concentrated in buildings, furnaces, means of transport, &c. corn-value, cloth- value, according to the commodity with which it is compared; and hence there are a thousand different kinds of value, as many kinds of value as there are commodities in existence, and all are equally real and equally nomi- nal." ("A Critical Dissertation on the Nature, Measures and Causes of Value: chiefly in reference to the writings of Mr. Ricardo and his followers." By the author of "Essays on the Formation, &c, of Opinions." London, 1825, p. In the potteries the Factory Act of 1864 "has whitewashed and cleansed upwards of 200 workshops, after a period of abstinence from any such cleaning, in many cases of 20 years, and in some, entirely," (this is the "abstinence" of the capitalist!) "in which were employed 27,800 artisans, hitherto breathing through protracted days and often nights of labour, a mephitic atmosphere, and which ren- dered an otherwise comparatively innocuous occupation, preg- nant with disease and death. 519 CHAPTER XVII CHANGES OF MAGNITUDE IN THE PRICE OF LABOUR-POWER AND IN SURPLUS-VALUE The value of labour-power is determined by the value of the necessaries of life habitually required by the average labourer. Each of these artific- ers (with the help, perhaps, of one or two apprentices), makes the entire commodity, and he consequently performs in succession all the operations necessary for its production. The children and young persons, therefore, in all such cases may justifiably claim from the legislature, as a natural right, that an exemption should be secured to them, from what destroys prematurely their physi- cal strength, and lowers them in the scale of intellectual and moral beings." 2 It was not, however, the misuse of parental au- thority that created the capitalistic exploitation, whether direct or indirect, of children's labour; but, on the contrary, it was the capitalistic mode of exploitation which, by sweeping away the economic basis of parental authority, made its exercise degenerate into a mischievous misuse of power. . And even in the latter case the dial, the springs, and the case, are seldom made in the factory itself. de Lavergne, a blind admirer of England, is inclined to estimate the share of the capitalist too low, rather than too high. 7yd. In it the genesis of the "capitalist farmer" or "merchant farmer," as he is explicitly called, may be studied, and his self-glorification at the expense of the small farmer who has only to do with bare subsistence, be noted. If we keep labour alone in view, we may designate the separa- tion of social production into its main divisions or genera— viz., agriculture, industries, &c, as division of labour in general, and the splitting up of these families into species and sub-species, as division of labour in particular, and the division of labour within the workshop as division of labour in singular or in detail. It once for all commands the same limit to the working-day in all shops and factories without distinction, whilst English legistation reluctantly yields to the pressure of circumstances, now on this point, now on that, and is getting lost in a hopelessly bewildering tangle of contradictory enactments. 216 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION quantity of surplus-value produced. The piston speed is easily ascertained. But it was only during the decade preceding 1866, that the construction of rail- ways and ocean steamers on a stupendous scale called into exist- 1 Eli Whitney's cotton gin had until very recent times undergone less essential changes than any other machine of the 18th century. . To this ready-made world of capital, the political economist applies the notions of law and of property inherited from a pre-capitalistic world with all the more anxious zeal and all the greater unction, the more loudly the facts cry out in the face of his ideology. . ra., so that we are really working over-time the whole year round." (Mr. Smith's "Evidence in Child. On the other hand, it also functions as money, when by virtue of its function, whether that function be performed in per- son or by representative, it congeals into the sole form of value, the only adequate form of existence of exchange-value, in opposi- tion to use-value, represented by all other commodities. of cotton absorb only the same amount of labour as formerly did the 6 lbs. Before the change, the total sum of £6,000 consisted half of constant, and half of variable capital. Thus, knives that are adapted to cut all sorts of things, may, on the whole, be of one shape; but an implement destined to be used exclusively in oneway must have a different shape tor every different use." 342 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION conditions for the existence of machinery, which consists of a combination of simple instruments. 9, 15, 16, 17.) 1 In Part I. 1 Paltry as the education clauses of the Act appear on the whole, yet they proclaim elementary education to be an indis- pensable condition to the employment of children. In England. The men employed by the underselling masters (who sell their bread under the 'full price,' and who, as already pointed out, comprise three- fourths of the London bakers) have not only to work on the average longer hours, but their work is almost entirely confined to the bakehouse. But first, one word on official pauperism, or on that part of the working-class which has forfeited its condition of existence (the sale of labour-power), and vegetates upon public alms. it [the Poor Law] tends to destroy the harmony and beauty, the symmetry and order of that system which God and Nature have established in the world." x If the Venetian monk found in the fatal destiny that makes misery eternal, the raison d'etre of Christian charity, celibacy, monasteries and holy houses, the Protestant prebendary finds in it a pretext for condemning the laws in virtue of which the poor possessed a right to a miserable public relief. 2 Capital that has such good reasons for denying the sufferings of the legions of workers that surround it, is in practice moved as much and as little by the sight of the coming degradation and final depopulation of the human race, as by the probable fall of the earth into the sun. Peter only establishes his own identity as a man by first comparing himself with Paul as being of like kind. III., pp 268-271, passim.) 3 Wakefield, .1 c, Vol. It always ends in the ruin of many small cap- italists, whose capitals partly pass into the hands of their con- querors, partly vanish. siecle ," p. . The getting with child of girls of 13 and 44 by their male companions of the same age, is common. His own yarns circulate, only because he brings his annual product to market, as all other capitalists likewise do with their commodities. 3 by 8 ft. The negligence of the employes is the cause of the mis- fortune. She assigned to the expelled inhabitants about 6,000 acres on the sea-shore — 2 acres per family. The constant tendency of capital is to force the cost of labour back towaids this zero. 2 "Wherever gold and silver have by law been made to perform the function of money or of a measure of value side by side, it has always been tried, but in vain, to treat them as one and the same material. His commodity possesses for himself no immediate use-value. We shall, therefore, in the third book, treat of this ratio ex- haustively. 16. On the other hand, the working-day has a maximum limit. (8.) Lincolnshire Langtoft. of Insp. Hinc turbae ortae et querulse textorum, tandemque usus hujus instrumenti a magistratu prohibitus est." After making various decrees more or less prohibitive against this loom in 1632, 1639, &c, the States General of Holland at length permitted it to be used, under cer- tain conditions, by the decree of the 15th December, 1661. In this case the agricultural labourer finds in him a second master, besides the farmer. The appearance of independence is kept up by means of a constant change of employers, and by the fictio juris of a contract. Each of the latter had a child while the family was living here, but one went to the workhouse for her confine- ment and then came home, (Jg8 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION (3.) Buckinghamshire 30 cottages— on 1,000 acres of land— contained here about 130-140 persons. This law clearly contradicts all experience based on appear- ance. They also regulate the dates for payments that have no direct connexion with the circulation of commodities such as taxes, rents, and so on. Wherever they set foot, devastation and depopulation followed. In the following pages we shall assume that capital circulates in its normal way. The linen expresses its value in the coat; the coat serves as the mate- rial in which that value is expressed. Moreover, if the conversion take place at all, that is, if the commodity be not absolutely unsaleable, its metamorphosis does take place although the price realised may be abnormally above or below the value. . by Mr. L. In order, however, to attain the ratio of 100:100 they must be equal. Again, the production of different commodities depends on different seasons of the year. c, p. We shall, therefore, notice, and that briefly, but two important cases. c, p. The price of labour-power and the degree of its exploitation cease to be commensurable quantities. 2 George Read, "The History of Baking," London, 1848, p. If production be capitalistic in form, so, too, will be reproduc- tion. c. What, on the other hand, characterises division of labour in manufactures? It should have compared the daily cost of such a negro with that of the free workman in the East-end of London. c, p ; 50. Men's wants increase or diminish with the severity or temperateness of the climate they live in; consequently, the proportion of trade which the inhabitants of different countries are obliged to carry on through necessity cannot be the same, nor is it practicable to ascertain the degree of variation farther than by the degrees of Heat and Cold; from whence one may make this general conclu- sion, that the quantity of labour required for a certain number of people is greatest in cold climates, and least in hot ones; for in the former men not only want more clothes, but the earth more cultivating than in the latter." ("An Essay on the Governing Causes of the Natural Rate of Interest." Lond. There is nothing mysterious in this. We bear in mind, however, that if the value of the coat is double that of 10 yds. The words on the title-page of the English edition, according to which the work is "Taken chiefly from the manuscript of a very ingenious gen- tleman, deceased, and adapted, etc.," seem, therefore, a pure fiction, very cus- tomary at that time. So long as the conditions of production remain the same, the more value the labourer adds by fresh labour, the more value he transfers and pre- serves; but he does so merely because this addition of new value takes place under conditions that have not varied and are inde- pendent of his own labour. 1 Professor Rogers, although formerly Professor of Political Economy in the University of Oxford, the hotbed of Protestant orthodoxy, in his preface to the "History of Agriculture" lays stress on the fact of the pauperisation of the mass of the people by the Reformation. For as much as all things are dearer than they were, so much do you arise in the pryce of your wares and occupations that ye sell agayne. . ... 3,301,683 . 2 The history of the Factory Act of 1850 will be found in the course of this chapter. of Insp. "The most wholesome mixtures of flour having been refused (by the English agricultural labourer) ... In the infancy of capitalist production, things often happened as in the infancy of mediseval towns, where the question, which of the escaped serfs should be master and which servant, was in great part decided by the earlier or later date of their flight. In the eyes of each other we are nothing but exchange-values. So that you are altogether too sanguine, in expecting that by such an addition of I-5- hours to the working-day, the rate will rise from 100% to 200% and more, in other words that it will be "more than dou- bled." On the other hand— man's heart is a wonderful thing, especially when carried in the purse— you take too pessimist a view, when you fear, that with a reduction of the hours of la- bour from 11— to 10, the whole of your net profit will go to the dogs. 1 Cf. F. Deduct- ing these there remains the net or surplus-product, in which the surplus-value lies. Simple reproduction is only the periodical repetition of this first operation; each time money is converted afresh into capital. "It is impossible for a child to pass through the purgatory of a tile-field without great moral degradation. The factory inspectors soon found out by ques- tioning the schoolmasters, that the factory children, although receiving only one half the education of the regular day schol- ars, yet learnt quite as much and often more. On the other hand, if we consider money, its existence implies a definite stage in the exchange of commodities. Long before insufficiency of diet is a matter of hygienic concern, long before the physiologist would think of counting the grains of nitrogen and carbon which intervene be- tween life and starvation, the household will have been utterly destitute of material comfort; clothing and fuel will have been even scantier than food— against inclemencies of weather there 1 1. The commodity linen manifests its quality of having a value by the fact that the coat, without having assumed a value-form different from its bodily form, is equated to the linen. Because the linen's price of £2, its de- nomination in money, has already equated the linen to gold in its character of money. From the middle of the 16th century the peasants of Eastern Prussia, Brandenburg, Pomerania, and Silesia, and soon after the free peasants of Schleswig- Holstein were degraded to the condition of serfs. This is stated in all seriousness by Mon- tesquieu: "Si Ton compare la masse de Tor et de l'argent qui est dans le monde avec la somme des marchandises qui y sont, il est certain que chaque denree ou marchandise, en particulier, pourra etre comparee a une certaine portion de la masse entiere. (S. 239. The local ratepay- ers themselves are driven by the parochial charges to the verge of pauperism,"--- (S tandard, 5th April, 1867.) THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 671 As it is the fashion amongst English capitalists to quote Belgium as the Paradise of the labourer because "freedom of labour," or what is the same thing, "freedom of capital," is there limited neither by the despotism of Trades' Unions, nor by Fac- tory Acts, a word or two on the "happiness" of the Belgian labour- er. But they are founded either on the immature devel- opment of man individually, who has not yet severed the um- bilical cord that unites him with his fellowmen in a primitive tribal community, or upon direct relations of subjection. * "The muslins of Dakka in fineness, the calicoes and other piece goods of Coroman- del in brilliant and durable colours, have never been surpassed. xix.) 2 For instance, abnormal development of some muscles, curvature of bones, &c. 26,319,924* Centralisation has from 1851 to 1861 destroyed principally farms of the first three categories, under 1 and not over 15 acres. There is here, therefore, an antinomy, right against right, both equally bearing the seal of the law of exchanges. m., are not suitable. . Hence, during the spinning process, the cotton absorbs six hours' labour. 2 The older writers, like Petty and the anonymous Author of "Advan- tages of the East. It becomes value only in its congealed state, when embodied in the form of some object. IV., ch. 36.) 378 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION little affected in its choice of residence by local circumstances. c, p. MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY in the mode of cultivation had led to the introduction of the indus- trial system. By increase in the productiveness of labour, we mean, generally, an alteration in the labour-process, of such a kind as to shorten the labour-time socially necessary for the pro- duction of a commodity, and to endow a given quantity of labour with the power of producing a greater quantity of use-value. It is, however, possible that, owing to an increase of produc- tiveness, both the labourer and the capitalist may simultaneously be able to appropriate a greater quantity of these necessaries, without any change in the price of labour-power or in surplus-value. Many, many thousands of these little, hapless creatures were sent down into the north, being from the age of 7 to the age of 13 or 14 years old. He may, on the other hand, "be done" by the clothes merchant. But where is the medal without its reverse! Any employment of machinery, acquired; he himself is a sort of machine. At the dawn of civilisation the productiveness acquired by labour is small, but so too are the wants which de- velop with and by the means of satisfying them. All individual distinctions are merged in those of "full-timers" and "half-timers." 3 SECTION 3.— BRANCHES OF ENGLISH INDUSTRY WITHOUT LEGAL LIMITS TO EXPLOITATION We have hitherto considered the tendency to the extension of the working-day, the were-wolf's hunger for surplus-labour in a department where the monstrous exactions, not surpassed, says an English bourgeois economist, by the cruelties of the Spaniards to the American red-skins, 4 caused capital at last to be bound by the chains of legal regulations. This condensation of a greater mass of labour into a given period thence- forward counts for what it really is, a greater quantity of labour. c.) 752 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION desperate outrages of the so-called Christian race, throughout every region of the world, and upon every people they have been able to subdue, are not to be paralleled by those of any other race, however fierce, however untaught, and however reckless of mercy and of shame, in any age of the earth." 1 The history of the colo- nial administration of Holland — and Holland was the head capitalistic nation of the 17th century — "is one of the most extraordinary relations of treachery, bribery, massacre, and mean- ness." 2 Nothing is more characteristic than their system of steal- ing men, to get slaves for Java. By a social contract of a quite original kind. No; it is very small. 13. In the Report of September, 1865, Dr. Bell, one of the poor law doctors of Bradford, ascribes the frightful mortality of fever-patients in his district to the na- ture of their dwellings. This constant quantity is the sum of the surplus-value plus the value of the labour-power, which latter value the labourer replaces by an equivalent. A riddle with which Quesnay, one of the founders of Political Economy, tormented his opponents, and to which they could give him no answer. There remains £132 as the weekly value created, which =£52 var.+£80surpl.The rate of sur- plus-value is therefore ^=153^%. The manufacturers began by here and there discharging a part of, in many cases half of, the young persons and women employed by them, and then, for the adult males, restoring the almost obsolete night-work. a gigantic fraud on the nation." (F. Not less than 34,000 persons live there in single rooms. and.... Skarbek: "Theorie des richesses sociales." Pans, 18.39, t. clay, sand, &c. How, then, in old Europe, was the expropriation of the labourer from his conditions of labour, i.e., the co-existence of capital and wage-labour, brought about? enabled to perfect himself by practice in one point, became ... owing to the greater attention and activity required by the greatly in- creased speed which is given to the machinery." 2 In the year 1844, Lord Ashley, now Lord Shaftesbury, made in the House of Com- 1 The moral element played an important part in the above experiments. The expropriators are expropriated. Here his apologetic armour crumbles off, bit by bit, like rotten touchwood. He takes 5 minutes from the beginning and from the end of the half hour nominally allowed for breakfast, and 10 minutes at the beginning and end of the hour nominally allowed for dinner. Individual consumption provides, on the one hand, the means for their maintenance and reproduction: on the other hand, it secures by the 1 "The labourers in the mines of S. 3 The reason is now therefore plain why, in analysing the stand- ard form of capital, the form under which it determines the eco- nomic organisation of modern society, we entirely left out of consideration its most popular, and, so to say, antediluvian forms, merchants' capital and money-lenders' capital. 55, n. 6 1. In order that it may play the part of money, gold must of cours3 enter the market at some point or other. I shall give the analysis of the real 1 In spite of his "Logic," John St. Mill never detects even such faulty analysis as this when made by his predecessors, an analysis which, even from the bourgeois standpoint of the science, cries out for rectification. A part of the agricultural labourers which, however, grows less day by day, dwells still on the holdings of the farmers in over-crowded huts, whose hideous- ness far surpasses the worst that the English agricultural labourers offered us in this way. In the following table is cal- culated the decrease or increase for each separate year, as com- pared with its immediate predecessor. Labour estimated by the day, is much lower in Scotland than in England... Deipnos.) 2 "Accrescere quanto pill si pu6 il numero de'venditori d'ogrii merce, diminuere quanto piu si pud il numero dei compratori, questi sono i cardini 134 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION By the side of the gross form of a hoard, we find also its aesthetic form in the possession of gold and silver articles. 249.) THE WORKING-DAY 263 well, but — " But Messrs. c, 194, p. Money based upon credit implies on the other hand conditions, which, from our standpoint of the simple circulation of commodities, are as yet totally unknown to us. c, p 104.) 3 [n this sense Necker speaks of the "objets de faste et de somptuosite," of which "le temps a grossi ('accumulation," and which "les lois de propri- ety out [assembles dans une seuleclasse de la societe." (CEuvres de M. there are materialised the 48 hours of labour expended, before the commencement of the spinning process, on the means of 2 production; and in the remaining Tnths or 4 lbs. 2 Gf. F. He came to work every day in the week at 6 a. The workroom is in a private house. Report, 1866," p. G. The organisation of the capi- talist process of production, once fully developed, breaks down all resistance. The capi- talist may even convert the additional capital into a machine that throws the producers of that capital out of work, and that replaces them by a few children. The violations of the Acts became more numerous during the last half year 1863. The use-value of the money-commodity becomes two-fold. At the end of one hour's spinning, that act is represented by a definite quantity of yarn; in other words, a definite quantity of labour, namely that of one hour, has become embodied in the cotton. of that island: "The His- tory of Java," Lond., 1817. The product of one form of useful labour replaces that of another. . The bodily form of the commodity becomes its value-form. the low language, which they are accustomed to hear from their tenderest years, the filthy, indecent, and shameless habits, amidst which, unknowing, and half wild, they grow up, make them in after-life lawless, abandoned, dissolute. (4) Farms over 1 5, not over 30 acres. . Done, toute la societe actuelle, fondee sur le travail-marchandise, est desormais fondee sur une license poetique, sur une expression figuree. As far as the actual agricultural labourers of both sexes and of all ages are concerned, their number fell from 1,241,396, in 1851, to 1,163,217 in 1861. And Bentham, because each looks only to himself. produced food for a swarming non-agricultural popu- lation, and this food, belonging to the monarch and the priesthood, afforded the means of erecting the mighty monuments which filled the land.... It is indeed notorious that the sphere of labour is not the only one in which primogeniture works miracles, 586 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION Nor does it matter if simple reproduction is replaced by repro- duction on an extended scale, by accumulation. A frightful source of demoralisation is the mode of living. The structure of the economic elements of society re- mains untouched by the storm-clouds of the political sky. 1 Let us now examine production as a creation of value. But viewed as a value-creating process, the same labour-process presents itself under its quanti- tative aspect alone. xix., n. "The Querist." London, 1751, p. on Railways," Lond., 1867, Minutes of Evidence, n. +£90 surpl., and that the capital ad- vanced =£500. 43, n. After remarking that the horse-power of steam-engines, being always estimated in the of- ficial returns according to the power of similar engines in 1828, * is only nominal, and can serve only as an index of their real power, he goes on to say: "I am confident that from the same weight of steam-engine machinery, we are now obtaining at least 50 per cent, more duty or work performed on the average, and that in many cases the identical steam-engines which in the days of the restricted speed of 220 feet per minute, yielded 50 horse-power, are now yielding upwards of 100." .... c, Bd. I., p. Since the relative form of value of a commodity — the linen, for example — expresses the value of that commodity, as being something wholly different from its substance and properties, as being, for instance, coat-like, we see that this expression itself indicates that some social relation lies at the bottom of it. Many of the hand-combers found employment in the facto- ries, but the produce of the hand-combers bears so small a proportion to that of the machine, that the employment of a very large number of combers has passed away." ("Rep. that in order to convert mon- ey into capital something more is required than the production and circulation of commodities. 247.) 350 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION bilities. The foundation of every division of labour that is well devel- oped, and brought about by the exchange of commodities, is the separation between town and country. To be a productive labourer is, therefore, not a piece of luck, but a misfortune. 1861.— 1 in 8. 234, 235.) Already it is evident here how in all spheres of social life the lion's share falls to the middleman. 2 Ramazzini, professor of practical medicine at Padua, published in 1713 his work "De morbis artiflcum", which was translated into French 1781, reprinted 1841 in the "Encyclopedic des Sciences Medicales. To be subject to these influences is a degrada- tion which must become deeper and deeper for those on whom it continues to work. We have no need at present to in- vestigate the value of this cotton, for our capitalist has, we will 1 As has been stated in a previous note, the English language has two different expressions for these two different aspects of labour: in the Simple Labour-process, the process of producing Use-Values, it is Work; in the process of creation of Value, it is Labour, taking the term in its strictly eco- nomic sense. In the elementary form, under which we have hitherto viewed it, co-operation is a necessary concomitant of all production on a large scale, but it does not, in itself, represent a fixed form charac- teristic of a particular epoch in the development of the capitalist mode of production. A one-sided observation of the results that followed upon the discovery of fresh supplies of gold and sil- ver, led some economists in the 17th, and particularly in the 18th century, to the false conclusion, that the prices of commodities had gone up in consequence of the increased quantity of gold and silver serving as means of circulation. l To show the condition of the labourers, I quote the following from the circumstantial report of a correspondent of the Morning Star, who, at the end of 1866, and beginning of 1867, visited the chief centres of distress: "In the East End districts of Poplar, Mill- wall, Greenwich, Deptford, Limehouse and Canning Town, at least 15,000 workmen and their families were in a state of utter destitution, and 3,000 skilled mechanics were breaking stones in the workhouse yard (after distress of over half a year's dura- tion) I had great difficulty in reaching the workhouse door, for a hungry crowd besieged it. The objective form of the social labour expended in its production. And they say so because, with them, surplus-value has no existence except in the form of rent. For an example of labour in common or directly associated labour, we have no occasion to go back to that spontaneously developed form which we find on the threshold of the history of all civilised races. Of his prayers and the like we take no account, since they are a source of pleasure to him, and he looks upon them as so much recreation. The working- day for "young persons and women," was raised from 10 to lOy hours for the first five days of the week, and was shortened to 1— on the Saturday. 1862, p. 100 and 130. . 34, 35.) It is natu- rally still more convenient to understand by value nothing at all. c. Apart from circulation, the commodity-owner is in relation only with his own commodity. Say. or 2 a. 770 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION labour-market. It is just nothing but a law of Nature, founded on the want of knowledge of those whose action is the subject of it." (Friedrich Engels: "Umrisse zu einer Kritik der Nationalokonomie," in the "Deutsch-Franzosische Jahrbucher," edited by Arnold Ruge and Karl Marx. 3 The hand nail-makers in England, e.g., have, on account of the low price of labour, to work 15 hours a day in order to hammer out their mis- erable weekly wage. . With regard to our weaver, the life of his com- modity ends with the Bible, into which he has reconverted his £2. But then, the ancient dens afforded a certain amount of unintentional venti- lation. This happened in Rome in its early days, where gold and silver coins circulated at first as foreign commodities. Name and substance, nominal weight and real weight, begin their process of separation. 1 Apart from its exchange for other commodities at the source of its production, gold, in whose-so-ever hands it may be, is the transformed shape of some commodity alienated by its owner; it is the product of a sale or of the first metamorphosis G — M. with some love of sport . The proportions in which they are exchangeable are at first quite a matter of chance. c, p. 1 Since the motion of the whole system does not proceed from the workman, but from the machinery, a change of persons can take place at any time without an interruption of the work. Pagnini: "Saggio sopra il giusto pregio delle cose, 1751"; Custodi "Parte Moderna," t. Another important factor in the accumulation of capital is the degree of productivity of social labour. Adam Smith has made it the fashion, to represent accumulation as nothing more than consumption of surplus-products by productive labourers, which amounts to saying, that the capitalising of surplus-value consists in merely turning surplus-value into labour-power. This fall in value would express itself in a still greater fall in price if the price of silver were not pegged even to-day by artificial means. m. The greatest service was rendered here by John Barton, although he, like all the rest, lumps togeth- er constant and fixed capital, variable and circulating capital. 298,847 399,992 379,329 NUMBER OF SPINDLES. All the usual arguments against the shortening of the working- day, assume that it takes place under the conditions we have here supposed to exist; but in reality the very contrary is the case: a change in the productiveness and intensity of labour either precedes, or immediately follows, a shortening of the working-day. Hence, with- in certain limits what is lost by shortening the duration is gained by the increasing tension of labour-power. that they ought to be high enough for him that receives them, to be free from that state of absolute dependence due to the want of the necessaries of life, and which is almost that of slavery," yet the workers must not be allowed to come to any understanding about their own interests, nor to act in common and thereby lessen their "absolute dependence, which is almost that of slavery;" because, forsooth, in doing this they injure "the freedom of their cidevant masters, the present entrepreneurs," and because a coalition against the despotism of the quondam masters of the corporations is — guess what! — is a restoration of { he corporations abolished by the French constitution. Total Income . The growth of population here forms the mathematical limit to the production of surplus-value by the total social capital. — The latest English and American "trusts" are already striving to attain this goal by attempting to unite at least all the large-scale concerns in one branch of industry into one great joint-stock company with a practical monopoly.—/'. Land grabbing on a great scale, such as was perpetrated in England, is the first step in creating a field for the establishment of agriculture on a great scale. The same labourer is punished for breach of contract if he remains away from his metal, paper, or glass works on the Sunday, even if it be from a religious whim. 247,012,529 lbs. c, p. ce que Ton payait 24." (Le Trosne, 1. One of the measures that we apply to commodities as material substances, as use-values, will serve to illustrate this point. Gradually it began to serve, within varying limits, as universal equivalent. On the other hand, the rate of surplus-value alone would not give us the extent of the working-day. During part of the day this force must rest, sleep; during another part the man has to satisfy other physical needs, to feed, wash, and clothe himself. If circumstances called for a fur- ther division of labour, the existing guilds split themselves up into varieties, or founded new guilds by the side of the old ones; all this, however, without concentrating various handicrafts in a sin- gle workshop. In Cork, where the strongest pos- sible demonstration of feeling took place, the masters, by exer- cising their power of turning the men out of employment, have defeated the movement. The money does not vanish on dropping out of the circuit of the metamorphosis of a given commodity. The mode of expression, you see, is everything. Emp. The former receives the value of his commodity, whose use-value— labour — is thereby alienated to the buyer. c, p. At the end of the process, we do not receive with one hand the origi- nal £100, and with the other, the surplus-value of £10. CAPITALIST PRODUCTION gradually establishes itself. * The minimum of the sum of value that the individual posses- sor of money or commodities must command, in order to meta- morphose himself into a capitalist, changes with the different stages of development of capitalist production, and is at given stages dif- ferent in different spheres of production, according to their special and technical conditions. At the starting-point it is not a use-value to its owner; at the finishing point it is. . On the one hand, it must, as a definite useful kind of labour, satisfy a definite social want, and thus hold its place as part and parcel of the collective labour of all, as a branch of a social division of labour that has sprung up spontaneously. The trial of Warren Hastings swarms with such cases. If, nevertheless, there follows a reflux of money to its starting- point, this can only happen through a renewal or repetition of the operation. The longer the life of the machine, the greater is the mass of the prod- ucts over which the value transmitted by the machine is spread, and the less is the portion of that value added to each single com- modity. The invariable object of the former is to get their work done as cheaply as possible; and they do not fail to employ every artifice to this purpose, whilst the latter are equally attentive to every occasion of distressing their masters into a compliance with higher demands." ("An Enquiry into the Causes of the Present High Price of Provisions," pp. If we now compare the two processes of producing value and of creating surplus-value, we see that the latter is nothing but the continuation of the former beyond a definite point. It is not their practice to deliver bread from house to house. The u:sire after hoarding is in its very nature unsatiable. of Fact for 31st Oct., 1856," p. The same holds good when the repartition of the value produced is exclusively kept in sight. rial (August 1863), in which the London day-labourers in fish and poultry shops asked for the abolition of Sunday labour, states that their work lasts for the first 6 days of the week on an average 15 hours a-day, and on Sunday 8-10 hours. The product of a working-day of 12 hours is 20 lbs. 69, p. Hence is it that in the history of capi- talist production, the determination of what is a working-day, presents itself as the result of a struggle, a struggle between col- lective capital, i.e., the class of capitalists, and collective labour, i.e., the working-class. t , ,, „ r , . 2 In those factories that have been longest subject to the Factory Acts, with their compulsory limitation of the hours of labour, and other regula- tions, many of the older abuses have vanished. and 4s. of Insp. x Further, every branch of industry attracts each year a new 1 A disciple of Ricardo, in answer to the insipidities of J. It was a pro-slavery rebellion in minia- ture, carried on for over two years with a cynical recklessness, a terrorist energy all the cheaper because the rebel capitalist risked nothing except the skin of his "hands." To understand that which follows we must remember that the Factory Acts of 1833, 1844, and 1847 were all three in force so far as the one did not amend the other: that not one of these limited the working-day of the male worker over 18, and that since 1833 the 15 hours from 5.30 a. The rea- son is, that a body of men working in concert has hands and eyes both before and behind, and is, to a certain degree, omnipresent. of Insp. Vanderlint, 1. Fairbairn discovered several very important 'applications of ma- chinery to the construction of machines, in consequence of strikes in his own workshops. The transactions in the market effectuate only the interchange of the individual components of this annual prod- uct, transfer them from one hand to another, but can neither aug- ment the total annual production, nor alter the nature of the objects produced. . Newman, I. An example. of Fact.," 31st October, 1856, p. The certificate of labour is merely evidence of the part taken by the individual in the common labour, and of MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OF COMMODITIES 95 The expression of the value of a commodity in gold— x commodity A=y money-commodity — is its money-form or price. The result of the whole transaction, as regards the weaver, is this, that instead of being in possession of the linen, he now has the Bible; instead of his original commodity, he now possesses another of the same value but of different utility. ggO CAPITALIST PRODUCTION goods on their backs, without any resting place but the work- house." 1 The workhouses are already over-crowded, and the "im- provements" already sanctioned by Parliament are only just begun. The collective labourer now possesses, in an equal degree of excellence, all the qualities requi- site for production, and expends them in the most economical man- ner, by exclusively employing all his organs, consisting of particular labourers, or groups of labourers, in performing their special func- tions. J A The altered character of the form of value All commodities now express their value (1) in an elementary form, because in a single commodity; (2) with unity, because in one and the same commodity. 2 This revolt of capital, after two years was at last crowned with victory by a decision of one of the four highest Courts of Justice in England, the Court of Exchequer, which in a case brought before it on February 8th, 1850, decided that the manufacturers were certainly acting against the sense of the Act of 1844, but that this Act itself contained certain words that ren- dered it meaningless. Instead of the equation, 20 yards of linen=l coat, we should have 20 yards of linen=2 coats, since 1 coat would now contain only half the labour-time embodied in 20 yards of linen. m. Compare, for example, England with India, or in ancient times, Athens and Corinth with the shores of the Black Sea. and 5.30 a. 566 CHAPTER XXIII SIMPLE REPRODUCTION Whatever the form of the process of production in a society, it must be a continuous process, must continue to go periodically through the same phases. Let us take one county that represents the average condition of things in all counties. 2 The suc- cess of those clauses proved for the first time the possibility of 1 It has been found out by experiment, that with each respiration of average intensity made by a healthy average individual, about 25 cubic inches of air are consumed, and that about 20 respirations are made in each minute. tends directly to encourage the young potter greatly to over-work himself during the four or five years during which he is employed in the piece-work system, but al low wages ... Great fortunes sprang up like mushrooms in a day; primitive accumulation went on without the advance of a shilling. l Just as every country needs a reserve of money for its home circulation, so, too, it requires one for external circulation in the markets of the world. i, ch. Od. has been produced in its place. The same value in variable capital therefore sets in movement more labour-power, and, therefore, more labour. "Mr. Senior has substituted for it" (the expression, labour and profit) "the expression Labour and Abstinence. This method gave rise in 1866 to a general strike in the English pottery districts. of tea, etc. Comm., VI. 2 The state of the agricultural labourer at the end of the Anti- Jacobin War, during which landed proprietors, farmers, manu- facturers, merchants, bankers, stockbrokers, army-contractors, &c, enriched themselves so extraordinarily, has been already indicated above. . Rep., 1866," pp. Many a shepherd and cottar too with his wife and children, appeared at Church in clothes which had been touched by no hands but their own, since they were shorn from the sheep and sown in the flaxfield. The Messrs. Think it is a country, but didn't know before." John Morris, age 14 — "Have heard say that God made the world, and that all the people was drownded but one; heard say that one was a little bird." William Smith, age 15 — "God made man, man made woman." Edward Taylor, age 15 — "Do not know of London." Henry Matthewman, age 17 — "Had been to chapel, but missed a good many times lately. Hence their independent value-form also, in these cases, confronts them under the shape of universal money. The consequence of this is that large quantities of the crop are left unpicked, while another portion is gathered from the ground when it has fallen, and is of course discoloured and partially rotted, so that for want of labour at the proper season the culti- vator is actually forced to submit to the loss of a large part of that crop for which England is so anxiously looking." ("Bengal Hurkaru." Bi-Monthly Overland Summary of News, 22nd July, 1861.) CO-OPERATION 329 tion of arena simultaneous with, and arising from, extension of scale, whereby a number of useless expenses are cut down, is owing to the conglomeration of labourers, to the aggregation of various processes, and to the concentration of the means of production. The legally guaranteed property of the poorer folk in a part of the church's tithes was tacitly confiscated. they have complained of over-work, and it is greatly to be regretted that the clear intention of the legislature should have failed by reason of a faulty definition." (1. . The lie was exposed by the THE WORKING-DAY 297 were placed under special Acts, by which, in the former, the la- bour of young persons and women during the night-time (from 8 in the evening to 6 in the morning), and in the latter, the employ- ment of journeymen bakers under 18, between 9 in the evening and 5 in the morning were forbidden. 2 Division of labour in society is brought about by the purchase and sale of the products of different branches of industry, while the connexion between the detail op- erations in a workshop, is due to the sale of the labour-power of several workmen to one capitalist, who applies it as combined labour-power. it cer- tainly appears that the former are much better fed than either of 1 Rogers, I. Tillie at Londonderry, which employs 1,000 operatives in the factory itself, and 9,000 people spread up and down the country and working in their own houses. Fifty thousand workpeople, who had MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 429 previously lived by carding wool, petitioned Parliament against Arkwright's scribbling mills and carding engines. It loses exchange-value, either by machines of the same sort being pro- duced cheaper than it, or by better machines entering into competi- tion with it. Master-manufac- turers know that there are various ways of raising and felling the price of labour, besides that of altering its nominal amount." (1. If I got only 12 hours' work out of my men, and my neighbour got 18 or 20, he must beat me in the selling price. What, however, first and foremost distinguishes the circuit C— M— G from the circuit M— G— M, is the inverted order of succession of the two phases. A soil incapable of produce by labour is quite as bad as a soil that produces plentifully without any labour." ("An Enquiry into the Causes of the Present High Price of Provisions." Lond. THE WORK-ING-DAY £59 1 8^- p. Let us now go back to the consideration of the price-form. 59. 1 As already stated, a steam-plough does as much work in one hour at a cost of threepence, as 66 men at a cost of 15 shillings. That the sufferings of the workmen displaced by machinery are therefore as transient as are the riches of this world. l The accumulation of commodities in great masses is the result either of over-production or of a stoppage of circula- tion. Lastly, we divide the sum thus obtained by the number of labourers to find out again how much may come to each on the average. This part is played by the iron only within this relation, into which the sugar or any other body, whose weight has to be COMMODITIES 57 determined, enters with the iron. — A favourite operation with manufacturers is to punish the workpeople by deductions made from their wages on account of faults in the material worked on. The number of labourers commanded by capital may remain the same, or even fall, while the variable capital increases. Both these economic factors bring about, in the compound ratio of the impulses they reciprocally give one another, that change in the technical composition of capital by which the variable constituent becomes always smaller and smaller as compared with the constant. The Act, there- fore, ordains the rebuilding of the decayed farm-steads, and fixes a proportion between corn land and pasture land, &c. 122. 311.) 570 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION what he thinks cannot alter facts. Great fluctuations in the amount of em- ployment, and great suffering: may become more frequent as capital itself becomes more plentiful." (Richard Jones, "An Introductory Lecture on Pol. His usufruct is spread over two periods. A third law results from the determination, of the mass of the surplus-value produced, by the two factors: rate of surplus-value and amount of variable capital advanced. 2 This holds likewise for Germany, and especially for Prussia east of the Elbe. In 1838, the number of hanks spun per week was 18,000, in 1843 it amounted to 21,000. of Fact., 30th April, 1863," pp. Part of them emi- grates, following in fact capital that has emigrated. If the transaction is repeated, it is repeated as the result of a new agreement which has nothing to do with the previous one and which only by chance brings the same seller together again with the same buyer. The producer of a particular commodity has that one article alone to offer; this he sells very often in large quantities, but his many and various wants compel him to split up the price realised, the sum of money set free, into numerous purchases. 2.) "L'argent n'est pas simple signe, car*il est lui-meme rich- esse; il ne represente pas les valeurs, il les equivaut." (Le Trosne, I. 1 Wakefield, 1. 50.) 488 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION production, variation of work, consequently fitness of the labourer for varied work, consequently the greatest possible development of his varied aptitudes. c, pp. The sum of the prices to be realised in the day is £8, the number of moves of the two pieces of money is four, and the quantity of money circulating is £2. Had I the courage of my friend, Heinrich Heine, I should call, Mr. Jeremy a genius in the way of bourgeois stupidity. In the first place, it becomes necessary that the labour should be carried on under normal conditions. Free Americans, who cultivate the soil, follow many other occupations. Edit., 1815, t. It is also favoured by the circumstance that preparatory needlework, and certain other operations, are most conveniently done on the premises where the machine is at work; as well as by the inevitable expropriation of the hand sewers, and of the domestic workers who work with their own machines. if additional quan- tities of raw material can be worked up without incurring an additional ex- pense for buildings and machinery." (R. As the co- operative character of the labour-process becomes more and more marked, so, as a necessary consequence, does our notion of pro- ductive labour, and of its agent the productive labourer, become extended. This sum is greater than the sum in which average social labour of the same kind is expressed: twelve hours of the latter labour are expressed by six shillings only. The next time he finished he had been on duty 14 hours 25 minutes, making a total of 29 hours 15 minutes without inter- mission. Pigs in 1865. While he is converting a portion of the means of production into products, a portion of his former product is being turned into mon- ey. The Relative form of value (a.) The nature and import of this form In order to discover how the elementary expression of the value of a commodity lies hidden in the value-relation of two commodi- ties, we must, in the first place, consider the latter entirely apart from its quantitative aspect. The result of difference in the natural conditions of labour is this, that the same quantity of labour satisfies, in different countries, a different mass of re- quirements, 3 consequently, that under circumstances in other re- 1 The necessity for predicting the rise and fall of the Nile created Egyp- tian astronomy, and with it the dominion of the priests, as directors of agri- culture. In it he points out applications, many of which, as for instance, the steam-hammer, were not introduced till half a century later. (Hen- ry Brougham: "An Inquiry into the Colonial Policy of the European Powers." Edin. The fact that the latter therefore has a value is expressed by saying that the coat is directly ex- changeable with it. "The first school we visited was kept by a Mrs. The first metamorphosis of one commodity, its transformation from a com- modity into money, is therefore also invariably the second meta- morphosis of some other commodity, the retransformation of the latter from money into a commodity. >s C3 t, as ft >?* 7^ <-> srage quantit orn, &c, in onsamed ann er head over bove the roduce consi a. But, whatever its motive, the consequences remain the same. 11., p 192. But this difference between the instrument as a whole and its daily wear and tear, is much greater in a machine than in a tool, because the machine, being made from more durable material, has a longer life; because its employment, being regulated by strictly scien- tific laws, allows of greater economy in the wear and tear of its parts, and in the materials it consumes; and lastly, because its totally different things. urges emigration. "But then there would be the loss from so much expensive machinery, lying idle half the time, and to get through the amount of work which we are able to do on the present system, we should have to double our premises and plant, which would double the outlay." But why should these Sandersons pretend to a privilege not enjoyed by the other capitalists who only work during the day, and whose buildings, machinery, raw material, therefore lie "idle" during the night? Here it is trumpeted forth as a tri- umph of English statecraft that at the Peace of Utrecht, England extorted from the Spaniards by the Asiento Treaty the privilege of being allowed to ply the negro-trade, until then only carried on between Africa and the English West Indies, between Africa and Spanish America as well. If it seize upon a particular stage in the production of a commodity, the other stages of its production become converted into so many in- dependent industries. The clearance and dispersion of the people is pursued by the proprietors as a settled principle, as an agricultural necessity, just as trees and brushwood are cleared from the wastes of America or Australia; and the oper- ation goes on in a quiet, business-like way, &c." 2 1 The deer-forests of Scotland contain not a single tree. The system on which they work, half manual labour, and half school, renders each employment a rest and a relief to the other; consequently, both are far more con- genial to the child, than would be the case were he kept constantly at one. The march of our analysis compels this splitting up of the subject-matter, a splitting up that is quite in keeping with the spirit of capitalist production. xiii.) On the importance of sunlight for the maintenance and growth of the body, a physician writes: "Light also acts upon the tissues of the body directly in hardening them and supporting their elasticity. On the other hand, the values of the means of production used up in the process are preserved, and present themselves afresh as constituent parts of the value of the product; the values of the cotton and the spindle, for instance, re-appear again in the value of the yarn. They can arise and exist only when the development of the productive power of labour has not risen beyond a low stage, and when, therefore, the social relations within the sphere of material life, between man and man, and between man and Nature, are corre- spondingly narrow. If then, on the one hand, the capitalist mode of production presents itself to us historically, as a necessary condition to the transformation of the labour-process into a social process, so, on the other hand, this social form of the labour-process presents it- self, as a method employed by capital for the more profitable ex- ploitation of labour, by increasing that labour's productiveness. The English do not make use of it, because the "wretch" 1 who does this work gets paid for such a small portion of his labour, that machinery would increase the cost of production to the capitalist. In Basilden, in 1851, 157 per- sons lived on 1,827 acres, in 35 houses; at the end of ten years, 180 persons in 27 houses. He acts in earnest up to the Gospel of abstention. 113.) Truly comical is M. It is in the lat- ter that building speculators can build cottages and lodging-houses. But the two commodities whose identity of quality is thus assumed, do not play the same part. 36. It has been stated over and over again that the English doctors are unanimous in declaring that where the work is continuous, 500 cubic feet is the very least space that should be allowed for each person. According to the third law, a change in the magnitude of sur- plus-value, pre-supposes a movement in the value of labour-power, which movement is brought about by a variation in the produc- tiveness of labour. 18, Note.— The Relieving Officer of the Chapel-en-le-Frith Union reported to the Registrar-General as follows: — "At Doveholes, a number of small excavations have been made into a large hillock of lime ashes (the refuse of lime-kilns), and which are used as dwellings, and occu- pied by labourers and others employed in the construction of a railway now in course of construction through that neighbourhood. Here, then, under our own eyes and on a large scale, a proc- ess is revealed, than which nothing more excellent could be wished for by orthodox economy for the support of its dogma: that 1 If the product also diminishes relatively per acre, it must not be for- gotten that for a century and a half England has indirectly exported the soil of Ireland, without as much as allowing its cultivators the means for making up the constituents of the soil that had been exhausted. If, on the other hand, all the conduits of circulation were to-day filled with paper money to the full extent of their capacity for absorbing money, they might to-morrow be overflowing in con- sequence of a fluctuation in the circulation of commodities. "Although," says Mr. Redgrave, "I have given the actual earnings of the operatives in the several mills, it does not follow that they earn the same amount week by week. . 2 If we confine our attention to some particular lot of raw mate- rials, of rags, for instance, in paper manufacture, or of wire in nee- dle manufacture, we perceive that it passes in succession through a series of stages in the hands of the various detail workmen until completion. See 1. The labour of the free peasants on their common land was transformed into corvee for the thieves of the common land. . 54 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION for the production of a coat becomes doubled, we have instead of 20 yards of linen =1 coat, 20 yards of linen =^2 coat. 1 "In general and within certain limits, exceeding the medium size of their kind, is evidence of the prosperity of organic beings. Horner in "Rep. But to enable it to render to its owner the service of a universal equivalent, it must be actually replaced by gold. . INCOME FROM PROFITS (OVER £60) IN IRELAND 1864 £. 709, 716, and Schorlemmer, "The Rise and Development of Organic Chemistry." London, 1879, p. of yarn the labour of five days, of which four days are due to the cotton and the lost steel of the spindle, the remaining day having been absorbed by the cotton during the spinning process. 3 3 6 " 2. 12-28 passim. . 1 Hence we find in the official documents contradictory complaints from the same places of deficiency and excess of labour simultaneously. in har- vest, 2 drivers, 2 loaders, 2 pitchers, 2 rakers, and the rest at the rick, or in the barn, will despatch double the work that the same number of hands would do if divided into different gangs on different farms." ("An Inquiry into the Connexion between the Present Price of Provisions and the Size of Farms." By a Farmer. Mill's Evidence. . He is the recruiting- sergeant for the gang, which works under him, not under the farmer. It expresses practically this: This engine would be one of 50 horse-power, if it were driv- en with the same low pressure of steam, and the same slow piston speed, as in the days of Boulton and Watt. Blase as Sir F. The means of production, with which the addi- tional labour-power is incorporated, as well as the necessaries with which the labourers are sustained, are nothing but component parts of the surplus-product, of the tribute annually exacted from the working-class by the capitalist class. This, it is hoped, will prevent persons in distress from wanting relief, and be the means of keeping down parishes." (R. c, pp. We followed up this false appearance to its final establishment, which is complete so soon as the universal equivalent form becomes identified with the bodily form of a particular commodity, and thus crystal- lised into the money-form. II, Minutes of Evidence. c, Postscript, p. iii, p. TV. If the corn is not all eaten, but part of it also sown— abstinence of the capitalist. During the 14th century arose the farms or terriers. Many manufacturers employ upwards of 3,000 of these lace-makers, who are chiefly children and young persons of the female sex exclusively. Of the former 30,810 were under, and 92,620 over 20 years. The rela- tion of exchange subsisting between capitalist and labourer be- comes a mere semblance appertaining to the process of circulation, a mere form, foreign to the real nature of the transaction, and only mystifying it. of linen =1 coat, it might, for ought that otherwise appears, be pure accident, that these two com- modities are exchangeable in definite quantities. But since an umbrella is a mixtum compositum of very heterogeneous parts, by degrees these parts became the products of various separate industries, carried on independently in different places. Between 1769 and 1770, the English manufactured a famine by buying up all the rice and refusing to sell it again, except at fabulous prices. 666 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION the "abstinence" of the capitalist from all expenditure that is not absolutely unavoidable. Com. 50. 6d., still this lower price would represent an increased mass of necessaries. I ittle thieves are put in the stocks, great thieves go flaunting in sold and silk... The names of these foreign coins never coincide with those of the indigenous weights. In this chapter we have, so far, treated it solely as a fund for accumulation. 17.) The Theory of Hume was defended against the attacks of J. He has not the least suspicion that the most simple 1 Such expressions of relations in general, called by Hegel reflex-cate- sories, form a very curious class. xi.) 478 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION a natural and rude reaction against the tedium of monotonous drudg- ery, it originates, also, to a much greater degree from anarchy in production, anarchy that in its turn pre-supposes unbridled exploi- tation of labour-power by the capitalist. c, p. Here, instead of the independent man, we find everyone dependent, serfs and lords, vassals and suzerains, laymen and clergy. 291.) 4 Ricardo, I. The buildings in which they work, the store-houses for the raw mate- rial, the implements and utensils used simultaneously or in turns by the workmen; in short, a portion of the. The value of a commodity, it is true, is determined by the quan- tity of labour contained in it, but this quantity is itself limited by social conditions. 31,821 33,622 1,801 Cabbages, 9.3 Flax, 301,693 251,433 50.260 Flax, st. "Memorandum by the Lord Chief Justice." Vol. Hence, money may be dirt, although dirt is not money. In spite of this, however, they do not let their government cradle itself in illusions. it will soon appear that in some manour seventeene, eighteene, or twentie houses are shrunk . 2 Placing on one side the generally injurious influence of night- labour, 3 the duration of the process of production, unbroken 1 Children's Employment Commission. In the tender annals of Political Economy, the idyllic reigns from time immemorial. But in no other way will it be influenced." (Ramsay. l 1 The subject of repairs of the implements of labour does not concern us here. 466,825 yds. So far, therefore, has the price of labour been even from advanc- ing in proportion to the increase in the expenses of living, that it does not appear that it bears now half the proportion to those expenses that it did bear." 2 Barton, 1. We have one old man more than 70 years of age to inspect more than 130 collieries." "You wish to have a class of sub-inspectors?" "Yes." (ns. 1 Up to this point we have considered men in only one econom- ic capacity, that of owners of commodities, a capacity in which they appropriate the produce of the labour of others, by 1 "Toute vente est achat." (Dr. Quesnay: "Dialogues sur le Commerce et les Travaux des Artisans." Physiocrates ed. He had already dealt with this subject in his earlier work: "Considerations on Taxes." London, 1765. et pour comble de ruine, il n'ose pas vendre ses productions ou et comme il le veut; il n'ose pas acheter ce dont il a besoin aux marchands qui pourraient le lui livrerau meilleur prix. The exchange between capital and labour at first presents itself to the mind in the same guise as the buying and selling of all other commodities. Raw material forms the substance of the product, but only after it has changed its form. I will, however, cite for the benefit of the romantic sycophant, Adam Miiller, who admires the "generous liberality" with which the English Government coins gratuitously, the fol- lowing opinion of Sir Dudley North: "Silver and gold, like other commodi- ties, have their ebbings and flowings. Thus the powerful men drew all wealth to them- selves, and all the land swarmed with slaves. 2 Report of the Insp. As William Petty puts it, labour is its father and the earth its mother. 2 The capitalist robs his own self, whenever he "lends (!) the instru- ments of production to the labourer," that is, whenever by incor- porating labour-power with them, he uses them to extract sur- plus-value out of that labour-power, instead of eating them up, steam-engines, cotton, railways, manure, horses, and all; or as the vulgar economist childishly puts it, instead of dissipating "their value" in luxuries and other articles of consumption. to 2 p. 4 Ferguson had already said, 1. 146. 17, 18. of Fact, for 31st Oct. Shortly afterwards, the town proletariat at Lyons sounded the tocsin of revolution, and the country proletariat in England began to set fire to farm-yards and corn-stacks. 3 "Land, to be an element of colonisation, must not only be waste, but it mu=l be public property, liable to be converted into private property." (1 c Vol II., p 125 ) 4 L. 'The parallelograms of Mr. Owen' appear to be the only form of society, besides the bourgeois form, with which he was ac- quainted." (Karl Marx: "Zur Kritik, &c," pp. Hence the whole of the cotton used up in spinning the 20 lbs. The cotton that was bought for £100 is perhaps resold for £100+ £10 or £110. x Since the surplus-labour is only an aliquot part of the working-day, or since surplus-value is only an aliquot part of the value created, the surplus-labour must necessarily be always less than the working- day, or the surplus-value always less than the total value created. . In 1835 " (query— 1815 or 1825?) "the spinner put up daily, on each of these mules, 820 stretches, making a total of 1,640 stretches in the course of the day. In the weaving industry, e.g., piece-wages had fall- en so low that in spite of the very great lengthening of the working- day, the daily wages were then lower than before. [Added in the 4 th German edition.— "Since then they have developed into the country 452 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION eft oo CM •tf CO V}< CM o 3 CO CM ^-i NT $ 00 fc co N? of Pol. They now protested in Lancashire and Yorkshire in threatening meetings. 2 3 5 " 5. Instead of being consumed by him as material ele- ments of his productive activity, they consume him as the ferment necessary to their own life-process, and the life-process of capital consists only in its movement as value constantly expanding, con- stantly multiplying itself. Econ.," p. The father and one child slept outside, but the difficulty of securing isolation was seen here, for in the crowded market of the miserable village lay the linen of the fever-stricken household, waiting for the wash. In order to express the value of the linen as a congelation of human labour, that value must be expressed as having objective existence, as being a something materially different from the linen itself, and yet a something common to the linen and all other commodities. (6) Farms over 50, not over 100 acres. The possessor of money or commodities actually turns into a capitalist in such cases only where the minimum sum advanced for production greatly exceeds the maximum of the middle ages. 1 Since the expression of the value of commodities in gold is a merely ideal act, we may use for this purpose imaginary or ideal money. . per week. is this a merely speculative objection?" (n. Then the value of the labour-power cannot rise from three shillings to four, without the surplus-value falling from three shillings to two; and the surplus-value cannot rise from three shillings to four, without the value of labour- power falling from three shillings to two. 2 "Suggestions, &c. Now, since relative surplus-value increases in direct pro- portion to the development of the productiveness of labour, while, on the other hand, the value of commodities diminishes in the same proportion; since one and the same process cheapens commodities, and augments the surplus-value contained in them; we have here the solution of the riddle: why does the capitalist, whose sole con- cern is the production of exchange-value, continually strive to depress the exchange-value of commodities? . Whenever the law limits the labour of children to 6 hours in industries not before interfered with, the complaints of the manufacturers are always renewed. And I have been informed of another, who, in order to keep with- out the law, but to attain the same object, charges the poor children who work for him a shilling each, as a fee for. Liverpool employed in the slave-trade, in 1730, 15 ships; in 1751, 53; in 1760, 74; in 1770, 96; and in 1792, 132. COMMODITIES 55 In fact, when a person exchanges his linen for many other commodities, and thus expresses its value in a series of other commodities, it necessarily follows, that the various owners of the latter exchange them for the linen, and consequently express the value of their various commodities in one and the same third commodity, the linen. He will then agree with Sismondi: "that capacity for labour ... Here, then, we see in Man- ufacture the immediate technical foundation of Modern Industry. from the answer of the manager of some large rolling-mills, who, when I asked him how the place of the boys absent from their turn was made up, 'I daresay, sir, you know that as well as I do,' and admitted the fact." 3 "At a rolling-mill where the proper hours were from 6 a. CONTRADICTIONS IN THE FORMULA OF CAPITAL 161 ties comes to him now as seller, who in this capacity also enjoys the privilege of selling his commodities 10% too dear. The latter sum, supposing wages unchanged, would form a fund sufficient to employ about 16 out of the 50 men discharged; nay, less than 16, for, in order to be em- ployed as capital, a part of this £500 must now become constant capital, thus leaving only the remainder to be laid out in labour- power. in reality teed both the pensioners ... The Money-form 20 yards of linen = "| 1 coat = 10 lbs. ol this book. Plato's Republic, in so far as division of labour is treated in it, as the formative principle of the State, is merely the Athenian idealisation of the Egyptian system of castes, Egypt having served as the model of an industrial country to many of his contemporaries also, amongst others to Isocrates, 2 and it dinate. If to classical economy, the proletarian is but a machine for the production of surplus-value; on the other hand, the capitalist is in its eyes only a machine for the conversion of this surplus-value into additional capital. Were that the case, the cup of surplus- value would be drained to the very dregs, and nothing but simple reproduction would ever take place. 1 "The natural worth of anything consists in its fitness to supply the necessities, or serve the conveniencies of human life." (John Locke, "Some Con- siderations on the Consequences of the Lowering of Interest, 1691," in Works Edit. The capitalist can, therefore, live a more jolly life, and at the same time show more "abstinence." And, finally, all the springs of pro- duction act with greater elasticity, the more its scale extends with the mass of the capital advanced. In this place we shall merely indicate a few results by way of anticipation. £2,000 is £2,000. "Artistic criticism is "harmful," because it disturbs worthy people in their enjoyment of Martin Tupper, etc. The working-day is thus not a constant, but a variable quantity. In one word, surplus-value is convertible into capital solely because the surplus-product, whose value it is, already comprises the material elements of new capital. II., p. 1 On the other hand, the cheapness of the articles produced by machinery, and the improved means of transport and communication furnish the weapons for conquering foreign markets. 1691, pp. Hence, a fall in the value of labour-power is also brought about by an increase in the productiveness of labour, and by a corresponding cheapening of commodities in those industries which supply the instruments of labour and the raw material, that form the material elements of the constant capital required for pro- ducing the necessaries of life. If the weekly wage, e.g., is 20s. For a proper understanding of the division of labour in manu- facture, it is essential that the following points be firmly grasped. "In most of the cotton, worsted, and silk mills, an exhausting state of excitement necessary to enable the workers satisfactorily to mind the machinery, the motion of which has been greatly accelerated within the last few years, seems to me not unlikely to be one of the causes of that excess of mortality from lung dis- ease, which Dr. Greenhow has pointed out in his recent report on this subject." 2 There cannot be the slightest doubt that the tendency that urges capital, so soon as a prolongation of the hours of labour is once for all forbidden, to compensate itself, by a systematic heightening of the intensity of labour, and to convert every improvement in machinery into a more perfect means of exhausting the workman, must soon lead to a state of things in which a reduction of the hours of labour will again be inevitable. For since in each year more labourers are em- ployed than in its predecessor, sooner or later a point must be reached, at which the requirements of accumulation begin to sur- pass the customary supply of labour, and, therefore, a rise of wages takes place. It functions as money, on the one hand, when it has to be present in its own golden person. No wonder therefore, that England, at the end of the 16th century, had a class of capitalist farmers, rich, con- sidering the circumstances of the time. The working-class was everywhere proclaimed, 1 p. It is the quantity of labour required for its production, not the realised form of that labour, by which the amount of the value of a commodity is determined. The composition of capital changed but very slowly. 768 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION "In the Northern States of the American Union, it may be doubted whether so many as a tenth of the people would fall under the description of hired labourers .... Bentham makes short work of it. In some States, particularly in Mexico (before the American Civil War, also in the territories taken from Mexico, and also, as a matter of fact, in the Danubian provinces till the revolution effected by Kusa), slavery is hidden under the form of peonage. A single equation, such as 1 ton of iron =2 ounces of gold, now suffices to express the value of the iron in a socially valid manner. 2 Reports, &c, for 31st October, 1849, p. Hence, too, the economic paradox, that the most powerful instrument for shortening labour-time, becomes the most unfailing means for placing every moment of the labourer's time and that of his fam- ily, at the disposal of the capitalist for the purpose of expanding the value of his capital. 462 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION motion, by means, of invisible threads, another army; that of the workers in the domestic industries, who dwell in the large towns and are also scattered over the face of the country. the first half of the 18th century complaint is made if the cottar-e of the agricultural labourer has not an adjunct of one or two acres of land. Even where their primary concern has been only with the injury to health, often almost perforce they have referred to other relations on the subject. " Even bad times are utilised by the manufac- turers, for making exceptional profits by excessive lowering of wages, i.e., by a direct robbery of the labourer's means of subsistence. Senior at the seventh annual con- gress of "The National Association for the Promotion of Social Science." in "Report of Proceedings, &c," Lond. Even Adam Smith and Ricardo, the best representatives of the school, treat the form of value as a thing of no importance, as having no connexion with the inherent nature of commodities. 2 1. It re- quires a fully developed production of commodities before, from accumulated experience alone, the scientific conviction springs up, that all the different kinds of private labour, which are carried on independently of each other, and yet as spontaneously devel- oped branches of the social division of labour, are continually being reduced to the quantitative proportions in which society requires them. xxxviii, and xxxix ) 1 Fourth Report, &c, 1865, 79, p. 2 In a thoroughly brutal way about 10 years after Ortes, the Church of England parson, Townsend, glorified misery as a necessary condition of wealth. 765 CHAPTER XXXIII THE MODERN THEORY OF COLONISATION 1 Political Economy confuses on principle two very different kinds of private property, of which one rests on the producers' own labour, the other on the employment of the labour of others. Sanderson would have to pay part of the wages of the adult men out of their own pockets instead of by the night- work of the boys. In 1866 a reduction in wages of 5 per cent, took place amongst the cotton opera- tives. to represent net wealth as beneficial to the labouring class ... 1 From what has been shown so far, it follows that piece-wage is the form of wages most in harmony with the capitalist mode of production. And 1 "As a reduction in their hours of work would cause a larger number (of children) to be employed, it was thought that the additional supply of children from 8 to 9 years of age would meet the increased demand" (1. "Child. Personified capital, the capitalist takes care that the labourer does his work regularly and with the proper degree of intensity. Moreover, there is here no question of service. D or=x Com. By means oi 1 "Tis by this practice they keep all their goods and manufactures at such low rates." (Vanderlint, 1. 2 But, both before and after these divisions are made, a definite weight of metal is the standard of metallic money. In 1851, 580 towns were distinguished, and the popula- tion in them and in the surrounding country was nearly equal. MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 463 bourhood, there are employed, mostly in very heavy work, 30,000 children and young persons, besides 10,000 women. These two first parts of the whole mechanism are there, solely for putting the working machines in motion, by means of which motion the subject of labour is seized upon and modified as desired. From 1838 to 1850, the average proportional increase in English cotton and other factories was 32%, while from 1850 to 1856 it amounted to 86%. The small and nimble fingers of little children being by very far the most in request, the custom instantly sprang up of procuring apprentices from the different parish workhouses of London, Birmingham, and elsewhere. Deipn. SECTION 2.— -THE MEDIUM OF CIRCULATION a. Now this method has become inadequate and has been forced into the background by the processing of the quartz lodes themselves, a way of extraction which formerly was only of secondary importance, al- though well known to the ancients (Diodorus, III, 12-14) (Diodor's v. This you say, amounts to lly hours a day. m. The merchant and shopkeeper want money in the same man- ner, that is, they want a vent for the goods they deal in, by reason that the markets fail".. Instead of as formerly one person with two helps tenting two looms, one person now tents three looms without helps, and it is no uncommon thing for one person to tent four. Being a transient and objective reflex of the prices of commodi- ties, it serves only as a symbol of itself, and is therefore capable of being replaced by a token. Circulation bursts through all restrictions as to time, place, and individuals, im- posed by direct barter, and this it effects by splitting up, into the antithesis of a sale and a purchase, the direct identity that in barter does exist between the alienation of one's own and the acqui- sition of some other man's product. Mr. Baker was formerly a doctor. 4 2s. When the process of production is finished, we get a commodity whose value =(c+ v)-j-s, where s is the surplus-value; or taking our former figures, the value of this commodity may be (£410 const. This difficulty, however, does not prevent life insurance offices from drawing, by means of the theory of averages, very ac- curate, and at the same time very profitable conclusions. The former applies to blast-furnaces, iron and copper mills, foundries, machine shops, metal manufactories, gutta-percha works, paper mills, glass-works, tobacco manufactories, letter- press printing (including newspapers), book-binding, in short to all industrial establishments of the above kind, in which 50 individuals or more are occupied simultaneously, and for not less than 100 days during the year. This extension of the surplus labour-time from b c to b' c, from 2 Jiours to 3 hours, is, however, evidently impossible, without a simultaneous con- THE CONCEPT OP RELATIVE SURPLUS-VALUE 313 traction of the necessary labour-time from a b into a b', from 10 hours to 9 hours. . They perhaps excused the slavery of one on the ground that it was a means to the full development of another. At Norwich, the chief seat of the clothing trade, a little creature of six years old was thought fit for labour. c, p. . of mill-owners working by shifts, the number amounts to 114, and has been for some time rapidly increasing. If, e.g., the habitual working-day is 10 hours and the daily 3 value of the labour-power 3s., the price of the working-hour is 3-^ d. . Classical economy is therefore quite right, when it maintains that the consumption of surplus-products by productive, instead of by unproductive labour- ers, is a characteristic feature of the process of accumulation. The whole of the labour in the yarn is past la- bour; and it is a matter of no importance that the operations nec- essary for the production of its constituent elements were car- ried on at times which, referred to the present, are more remote than the final operation of spinning. These workmen are condemned to live, from their ninth year till their death, under this mental and bodily tor- ture." (F. Here, however, we are only concerned with the phenomenon in its integrity, and we therefore assume its progress to be normal. 27. and inquired what they considered a day's work, and was told 13 hours for a goods man (i.e., 78 hours).... Hence, rapid renewal of the generations of labourers (this law does not hold for the other classes of the population). 1 The powerful and ever-increasing assistance given by past labour to the living labour-process under the form of means of production is, therefore, attributed to that form of past labour in which it is alienated, as unpaid labour, from the worker himself, i.e., to its capitalistic form. (What mealy-mouthed phraseology!) Labour is scarce here, and might fall short if there were such a regulation." (i.e., Ellis Brown & Go. might fall into the fatal perplexity of being obliged to pay. This is because the technical foun- dation of the factory system, namely, the substitution of ma- chines for muscular power, and the light character of the labour, is almost entirely absent in Manufacture, and at the same time women and over-young children are subjected, in a most uncon- scionable way, to the influence of poisonous or injurious sub- stances. 3d which was formerly priced at 4s. m. le mestier, le fait, l'etat, la provision et toute l'ordonnance des monnaies, de donner tel cours, et pour tel prix comme il nous plait et bon nous semble." It was a maxim of the Roman Law that the value of money was fixed by decree of the emperor. It, on the one hand, the mere formal subjection of labour to capital suffices for the production of absolute surplus-value, if, e.g., it is sufficient that handicraftsmen who previously worked on their own account, or as apprentices of a master, should become wage-labourers under the direct control of a capitalist; so, on the other hand, we have seen, how the methods of producing relative surplus-value, are, at the same time, methods of producing abso- lute surplus-value. The amount of fixed capital employed in the production of a piece of British muslin is at least a hundred, probably a thousand times greater than that employed in a similar piece of Indian muslin. on the stretch to economise time and labour." (Dugald Stewart: Works ed. Otherwise with capital. To set in motion the part of social wealth which is to function as constant capital, or, to express it in a material form, as means of production, a definite mass of living labour is required. In our example, C =£410 const. of Fact.," 31st October, 1855, p. £54 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION London during the last ten years proves beyond doubt the grow- ing horror in which the working-people hold the slavery of the workhouse, that place of punishment for misery. EXCHANGE gg Man has often made man himself, under the form of slaves, serve as the primitive material of money, but has never used land for that purpose. These people are so exhausted after the day's hard work, that neither the rules of health, of cleanliness, nor of decency are in the least observed. — We have a still more striking example in the facility with whioh the same France was able in 1871-73 to pay off within 30 months a forced contribution more than ten times as great, a considerable part of it likewise in specie. . of Fact., 31st Oct., 1860," p. Exactly a year before Nassau W. l Thus, hand in hand with the expropriation of the self-supporting peasants, with their separa- tion from their means of production, goes the destruction of rural domestic industry, the process of separation between manufac- ture and agriculture. 339). An American revolution and a universal crisis, in order that the working girls, who spin for the whole world, might learn to sew! 2 "The numerical increase of labourers has been great, through the growing substitution of female for male, and above all, of childish for adult labour. It is not called into use by a scarcity of men, but by the facility with which they can be brought to work in masses." (Piercy Ravenstone: "Thoughts on the Funding System and its Effects." London, 1824, p. We let pass such extraordinary notions as are of no importance for our purpose; for instance, the assertion, that manufac- turers reckon as part of their profit, gross or net, the amount required to make good wear and tear of machinery, or in other words, to replace a part of the capital. . In the same proportion as these instruments of labour serve as product-formers without adding value to the product, i.e., in the same proportion as they are wholly employed but only partly consumed, they perform, as we saw earlier, the same gratuitous service as the natural forces, water, steam, air, electricity, etc. Pol." Paris, 1819, t. It is of course understood that, by "Value of the Product," is meant only the value newly created in a working-day, the constant part of the value of the product being excluded. Early in the manufacturing period, the principle of lessening the necessary labour-time in the production of commodities, 1 was accepted and formulated: and the use of machines, especially for certain simple first processes that have to be conducted on a very large scale, and with the application of great force, sprang up here and there. . m. Formerly their skilled labour necessarily produced all the parts of engines. The total number of persons, therefore, employed in these five new industries amounts to 94,145. ' Here we see the modern instincts of feudalism ... Nevertheless, the laws for keeping them down remained in force, together with the ear-clipping and branding of those "whom no one was willing to take into service." By the Statute of Appren- tices 5 Elizabeth, c. c, p. The consumption of food by a beast of burden is none the less a necessary factor in the process of production, because the beast enjoys what it eats. Seventh Report, 1865," pp. 151, 154, 155.) In Pact, in this "Paradise of capitalists" there follows, on the smallest change in the price of the most essential means of subsistence, a change in the number of deaths and crimes! (See Manifesto of the Maatschappij: "De Vlamingen Vooruit!" Brussels, 1860, pp. they necessarily have a better knowledge of the operations in connexion with the mine." "You do not think there would be a tendency on the part of the workmen to return unfairly severe verdicts?" "No, I think not." (ns. As the author is himself a labourer and secretary of a Trades' Union, this might be taken for exaggeration. His emancipation at once transformed him into a free proletarian, who, moreover, found his master ready waiting for him in the towns, for the most part handed down as legacies from the Roman time. "They try, of course, to remain as near as possible to their workshops. 3 Belgium is the model bourgeois state in regard to the regulation ot the working-day. Both, therefore, possess the general property of being human labour, and may, therefore, in certain cases, such as in the production of value, have to be considered under this aspect alone. Now it is quite possible to imagine, with Adam Smith, that the difference between the above social division of labour, and the division in manufacture, is merely subjective, exists merely for the observer, who, in a manufacture, can see with one glance, all the numerous operations being performed on one spot, while in the instance giv- en above, the spreading out of the work over great areas, and the great number of people employed in each branch of labour, obscure the connexion. 29.) James Harris, afterwards Earl of Malmesbury, celebrated for the "Diaries" of his embassy at St. Petersburg, says in a note to his "Dialogue Concerning Happiness," Lond., 1741, reprinted afterwards in "Three Treatises, &c," 3 Ed., Lond., 1772: "The whole argument to prove society natural (i.e., by division of employments) ... 321), which has in no way a tendency to raise wages. But here again, the change in value originates outside the process in which the machine is acting as a means of production. These were ordinary export shirtings. 25, n. Those ancient social organisms of production are, as compared with bourgeois society, extremely simple and transparent. 3 To get rid of the abuses of the "spurious relay system," the law established besides others the following important regula- tions: — "That the hours of work of children and young persons shall be reckoned from the time when any child or young per- son shall begin to work in the morning." So that if A, e.g., be- gins work at 8 in the morning, and B at 10, B's work-day must nevertheless end at the same hour as A's. In Birmingham alone 500 varieties of hammers are produced, and not only is each adapted to one particular proc- ess, but several varieties often serve exclusively for the different operations in one and the same process. 182, sq, 2 A. Y One does not per- ceive, when looking at the large manufactories and the large farms, that they have originated from the throwing into one of many small centres uf production, and have been built up by the expropriation of many small independent producers. ("Revolu- tions de Paris," Paris, 1791, t. . He is a democratic emperor, or a kind of Pied Piper of Hamelin. . . The law of the supply and demand of labour falls to pieces. Occupied with the difference between the market-price of labour and its so-called value, with the relation of this value to the rate of profit, and to the values of the commodities produced by means of labour, &c, they never discovered that the course of the analy- sis had led not only from the market-prices of labour to its presumed value, but had led to the resolution of this value of labour itself into the value of labour-power. Consequently, although it is strictly forbidden in many, nay in most factories, that machinery should be cleaned while in motion, it is nevertheless the constant practice in most, if not in all, that the workpeople do, unreproved, pick out waste, wipe rollers and wheels, &c, while their frames are in motion. But the Pharisee of a capitalist, as may be seen from the same reports, denounces this brutality which he himself creates, perpetuates, and exploits, and which he moreover baptises "freedom of labour." "Infant labour has been called into aid... 77, 78. Hence the expression of the equivalence of a commodity with the sum of money constituting its price, is a tautology, 8 just as in general the expression of the relative value of a commodity is a statement of the equivalence of two commodities. I con- sidered it useless to prosecute more for this evasion of the law. c, p. Wages, as we have seen, by their very nature, always imply the performance of a certain quantity of unpaid labour on the part of the labourer. c, p. 429.) 128 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION circulate if not replaced by symbols. of Fact.," 31st Oct., 1848, p. Each circuit is the unity of the same two an- tithetical phases, and in each case this unity is brought about by the intervention of three contracting parties, of whom one only sells, another only buys, while the third both buys and sells. What a splendid result of the capitalist exploitation of machinery! SECTION 7.— REPULSION AND ATTRACTION OF WORKPEOPLE BY THE FACTORY SYSTEM. ... The development of the productive power of labour reacts also on the original capital already engaged in the process of production. To the elementary relative value-form of a commodity, there corresponds the single equiv- alent form of one other commodity. It deserts the consumed body, to occupy the newly created one. Would he otherwise sell it? learning them the art and mystery of cotton spinning, so soon as they are declared by the surgeon fit and proper persons for that occupation. Acts is to force on the further introduction of machinery" (1. The productive powers of labour are generally greatest where there is an abun- dance of fertile land.' If, in the first sentence, the productive powers of la- bour mean the smallness of that aliquot part of any produce that goes to those whose manual labour produced it, the sentence is nearly identical, because the remaining aliquot part is the fund whence capital can, if the owner pleases, be accumulated. . On the contrary, the rise in price may be accompanied by a fall in value. c, pp. Their functions, as well as their names, are constantly interchanged. It must be annihi- lated; it is annihilated. With the carpets in the form of money, they bought means of subsistence to the value of £1,500. I am convinced that by proper supervision of scutching mills a vast sacrifice of life and limb would be averted." 1 What could possibly show better the character of the capi- talist mode of production, than the necessity that exists for forcing upon it, by Acts of Parliament, the simplest appliances for maintaining cleanliness and health? He meets the effort; the result is, that producing for a limited time a fourth more work, he dies at 37 for 50." 1 SECTION 4.— DAY AND NIGHT WORK. Little as Vulgar-Economy knows about the nature of value, yet whenever it wishes to consider the phenomena of circulation in their purity, it assumes that supply and demand are equal, which amounts to this, that their effect is nil. p- 25. CONSTANT CAPITAL AND VARIABLE CAPITAL 209 in the process of expanding its own value. If the wine gets time to mature— abstinence of the capitalist. x But the brave Gaels must expiate yet more bitterly their idolatry, romantic and of the mountains, for the "great men" of the clan. They perform this weary task, in London especially, for 14, 15, and 16 hours at a stretch, during several days in the week, and frequently for 36 hours, with only 2 hours' rest for meals and sleep. If, on the other hand, these same articles are links in the following chain of metamorphoses: 1 quarter of wheat — £2—20 yards of linen— £2—1 Bible— £2— 4 gallons of brandy— £2, a chain that is already well known to us, in that case the £2 cause the different commodities to circulate one after the other, and after realising their prices successively, and therefore the sum of those prices, £8, they come to rest at last in the pocket of the distiller. The detail operations may further be carried on like so many independent handicrafts, as they are in the Cantons of Vaud and Neufchatel; while in Geneva there exist large watch manufactories where the detail labourers directly co-operate under the control of a single capitalist. In the direct barter of products, each commodity is directly a means of exchange to its owner, and to all other persons an equivalent, but that only in so far as it has use-value for them. 53, n. But the Mayor being apprehensive that this invention might throw a large number of workmen on the streets, caused the inventor to be secretly strangled or drowned." In Leyden, this machine was not used till 1629; there the riots of the ribbon-weavers at length compelled the Town Council to prohibit it. Now, the profits of our manufacturers depend mainly on the power of making use of the prosperous moment when demand is brisk, and thus compensat- ing themselves for the interval during which it is slack. 3 Sooqsiv is a characteristic Greek expression for hoarding. The above economic fiction confuses the laws that regulate the general movement of wages, or the ratio between the working- class — i.e., the total labour-power — and the total social capi- tal, with the laws that distribute the working population over the different spheres of production. Now, since in equal periods he produces equal val- ues, the produce of the last hour but one, must have the same value as that of the last hour. The serf was emanci- pated in that country before he had acquired any prescriptive right to the soil. On the other hand, the manufacture of the product may be united with oth- er manufactures, of which that product is the raw material, or with the products of which it is itself subsequently mixed. 2 "The wages of labour depend upon the price of labour and the quan- tity of labour performed.... No, he produces capital. All those things which labour merely separates from immediate connexion with their environment, are subjects of labour spontaneously pro- vided by Nature. But another portion is consumed by the members as means of subsistence. If each could find an allotment near his work, he would not prefer Badsey, where he pays for his scrap of ground twice as much as the farmer pays for his." The continual emigration to the towns, the continual formation of surplus-population in the country through the concentration of farms, conversion of arable land into pasture, machinery, &c, and the continual eviction of the agricultural population by the destruction of their cottages, go hand in hand. 1 "Those who labour ... THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 703 marked off by a wide channel from the country to which it yields corn, wool, cattle, industrial and military recruits. The magnitude of the profit whets his appetite for more profit. The following example will show how Monsieur Say turned to account the writings of the Physiocrats, in his day quite forgotten, for the purpose of expanding the "value" of his own. Therefore, first: the valid exchange-values of a given commodity express something equal; secondly, exchange-value, generally, is only the mode of expression, the phenomenal form, of something contained in it, yet distinguishable from it. In Book IV. Certificates of the debts owing for the purchased commodities circulate for the purpose of transferring those debts to others. 1 3 families Rifle Court Marygate, No. 11 . 1,068 672 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION The annual expenditure of the family would cause a deficit upon the hypothesis that the labourer has the food of: The man of war's man fr. But it is different as soon as we deal with the process of production from the point of view of the process of creation of surplus- value. After it has made 56 days out of 12, the nominal day's work of each of the 56 corvee days is again so arranged that a portion of it must fall on the ensuing day. Every one knows, if he knows nothing else, that commodities have a value-form common to them all, and presenting a marked contrast with the varied bodily forms of their use-values. And my assertion that, in the first 5^- hours, 3 he produces his wages, and in the last 5^- hours your net profit, amounts only to this, that you pay him for the former, but not for the latter. The watch manufactory of Messrs. Say: "Traite d'Econ. The necessary part of his working-day amounts to 6 hours, and is, there- fore, caeteris paribus, a given quantity. c, Vol. It is in Cuba, at this day, whose revenues are reckoned by millions, and whose planters are princes, that we see in the ser- vile class, the coarsest L.re, the most exhausting and unremit- ting toil, and even the absolute destruction of a portion of its numbers every year." 1 1 Cairnes, "The Slave Power," pp. of his translation of A. Whence they infer the necessity of even the necessaries of life being made dear by taxes, or any other means, to compel the working artisan and manufacturer to labour the whole six days in the week, without ceasing. ABSOLUTE AND RELATIVE SURPLUS-VALUE 5I5. 3 If, at first, the workman sells his labour-power to capital, because the material means of producing a commodity fail him, now his very labour-power refuses its services unless it has been sold to capital. 1 was firmly convinced that I was fit for nothing but letter-press printing. Pol., 1663), referring to the introduction of this machine into Leyden, "ante hos viginti circiter annos instrumentum quidam invenerunt textorium, quo solus plus panni et facilius conficere poterat, quan plures aequali tempore. Leaving the workhouse, I took a walk through the streets, mostly of little one-storey houses, that abound in the neigh- bourhood of Poplar. c, p. 662 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION As result of the ebbing and flowing of capital and labour, the state of the dwellings of an industrial town may to-day be bearable, to-morrow hideous. Classical economy, although not formulating the law, holds instinctively to it, because it is a necessary conse- quence of the general law of value. of cotton must vanish into dust, before 100 lbs. In a society where all products assume the form of commodities, these commodities must be sold after they have been produced, it is only after their sale that they can serve in satisfying the requirements of their producer. The Metamorphosis of Commodities We saw in a former chapter that the exchange of commodi- ties implies contradictory and mutually exclusive conditions. 90 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION We have seen that the money-form is but the reflex, thrown upon one single commodity, of the value relations between all the rest. It enters into the faux frais of capitalist production; but capital knows how to throw these, for the most part, from its own shoulders on to those of the working-class and the lower middle class. This ebbing and flowing of money supplies and accommodates itself, without any aid of Politicians.... 4 1 In 1790, there were in the English West Indies ten slaves for one free man, in the French fourteen forone, in the Dutch twenty-three for one. As the coat and the linen are two qualitatively different use- values, so also are the two forms of labour that produce them, tailoring and weaving. Dante would have found the worst horrors of his Inferno surpassed in this manufacture. It calls to mind the boundless reproduc- tion of animals individually weak and constantly hunted down. Being a pupil of A. To assume that there is an invariable ratio between the quantities of gold and silver in which a given quantity of labour-time is incorporated, is to assume, in fact, that gold and silver are of one and the same material, and that a given mass of the less valuable metal, silver, is a constant fraction of a given mass of gold. To nothing more probably than the relaxation of the working people in their own way. The natural grass of Glen Tilt was among the most nutritive in the county of Perth. To reduce the long trudges over these wide plains, the beau- tiful pastures of Leicester and Northampton, the shepherd used to get a cot- tage on the farm. given birth in the minds of the labourers to corresponding sentiments of antagonism and dissatisfaction towards those by whom they are thus led to regard themselves as being treated as ... The use-value pro- duced by him in one hour, is a definite quantity of yarn. When it steps into circulation as money, its value is already given. And if their value rise either slower or faster than that of money, the fall or rise in their prices will be determined by the differ- ence between the change in their value and that of money; and so on. On the other hand, every one knows that the dearness of dwellings is in inverse ratio to their excellence, and that the mines 1 1. Economy." New York, 1851, pp. At one time gold was too high, at another, silver. Senior, in his posthumous work, al- ready quoted, terms "the proceedings in Sutherlandshire one of the most beneficent clearings since the memory of man." (1. 1 We assumed in our example, that the value of the product =£410 const. They caused "15 lbs. On a comparison of the text of his compendium, "Principles of Pol. 4 Still, Condillac's argument is 1 "L'Schange devient desavantageux pour l'une des parties, lorsque quel- que chose etrangere vient diminuer ou exagerer le prix; alors l'egalite est blessee, mais la lesion procede de cette cause et non de l'echange." (Le Trosne, 1. When they are not on the march, they "camp." Nomad labour is used for various operations of building and draining, brick-making, lime-burning, railway-making, &c. The motor mechanism is that which puts the whole in motion. 1 "We have given in our previous reports the statements of several experienced manufacturers to the effect that over-hours ... But besides this, the majority of the manufacturers reduced the rate of piece-wage by5, 7-y, and 10 per cent. The results of the admirable work of Dr. Julian Hunter are to be found in the seventh (1865) and eighth (1866) reports on "Public Health." To the agricultural labourers, I shall come later. But with the development of exchange it fixes itself firmly and exclusively to particular sorts of commodities, and becomes crystallised by assuming the money- form. The Act of 1850 was therefore finally completed in 1853 by forbidding the "employment of children in the morn- ing before and in the evening after young persons and women." Henceforth with a few exceptions the Factory Act of 1850 regu- lated the working-day of all workers in the branches of industry that come under it. The value of a day's labour-power, is, as will be remembered, estimated from its normal average duration, or from the normal duration of life among the labourers, and from corresponding normal transformations of organised bodily matter into motion, x in conformity with the nature of man. Say, by that very example, the difference between use-value (which he here calls wealth or material riches) and exchange-value. The number of the operatives was, in 1850, 79,737; in 1856, 87,794; in 1862, 86,063; included in these, however, the children under 14 years of age were, in 1850, 9,956; in 1856, 11,228; in 1862, 13,178. 587 "laws ol capitalist appropriation.") has been added to the English text in conformity with the 4th German edi- tion.—/^. Suppose the following articles to be sold or partially meta- morphosed simultaneously in different localities: say, one quarter of wheat, 20 yards of linen, one Bible, and 4 gallons of brandy. Answer: Yes, and in fact the competition between the hand-loom and the power-loom is main- tained out of the poor-rates.' Thus degrading pauperism or expatriation, is the benefit which the industrious receive from the introduction of machinery, to be reduced from the respectable and in some degree independent mechanic, to the cringing wretch who lives on the debasing bread of charity. But the progress of capitalist production not only creates a world of delights; it lays open, in speculation and the credit system, lies) as he who starves a man or utterly undoes him. Since the quantity of money capa- ble of being absorbed by the circulation is given for a given mean velocity of currency, all that is necessary in order to abstract a given number of sovereigns from the circulation is to throw the same number of one-pound notes into it, a trick well known to all bankers. Along with the progress in the productiveness of labour, that small portion of society increases both absolutely and relatively. TRANSITION OF THE LAWS OF PROPERTY THAT CHARACTERISE PRODUCTION OF COMMODITIES INTO LAWS OF CAPITALIST APPROPRIATION Hitherto we have investigated how surplus-value emanates from capital; we have now to see how capital arises from sur- plus-value. —Since 1842 women are no more employed underground, but are occupied on the surface in loading the coal, &c, in drawing the tubs to the canals and railway waggons, in sorting, &c. 1862. For it is a fact, that a mountain range laid out in forest is, in many cases, more profitable to the proprietor than when let as a sheep-walk The huntsman who wants a deer-forest limits his offers by no other calculation than the extent of his purse. I shall show in Book III. I.) In like manner, ex officio, he opens his work with an apotheosis on the divi- sion of labour. 116, 110.) 608 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION that serve for the attainment of particular useful effects, whilst they themselves only gradually wear out, therefore only lose their value piecemeal, therefore transfer that value to the product only bit by bit. 5 by 8 ft. In the former, where the physiological division of labour is the starting-point, the particular organs of a compact whole grow loose, and break off, principally owing to the exchange of commodities with foreign communities, and then isolate them- selves so far, that the sole bond, still connecting the various kinds of work, is the exchange of the products as commodities. — Note by the Institute of Marxism- Leninism in the Russian edition. Od., paid for seed and manure, is constant capital, and we put it equal to zero. But the constant flow towards the towns pre- supposes, in the country itself, a constant latent surplus-popula- tion, the extent of which becomes evident only when its channels of outlet open to exceptional width. This is no defect, but, on the contrary, admirably adapts the price-form to a mode of production whose inherent laws impose themselves only as the mean of appar- ently lawless irregularities that compensate one another. The money again leaves me, so soon as I complete this second transaction by a fresh purchase. 12, 14, 18.) 1 This sort of labour goes on mostly in small workshops, as we have seen in the lace-making and straw-plaiting trades, and as could be shown more in detail from the metal trades of Sheffield, Birmingham, &c. But what was the good of summoning the capitalists when the Courts, in this case the country magistrates— Gobbett's "Great Unpaid" — acquitted them? It has been seen further that, even with a given magnitude of functioning capital, the labour- power, the science, and the land (by which are to be understood, economically, all conditions of labour furnished by Nature inde- pendently of man), embodied in it, form elastic powers of capi- tal, allowing it, within certain limits, a field of action independ- ent of its own magnitude. . of yarn worth 3 shillings, a value equal to the whole value he creates in his 6 hours' necessary labour. 55, 56; p. The forms A and B were fit only to express the value of a com- modity as something distinct from its use-value or material form. From this moment the capital-value and the surplus-value are both of them sums of money , and their reconversion into capital takes place in precisely the same way. Still the manufacturing period, properly so called, does not, suc- ceed in carrying out this transformation radically and complete- ly. III. they would not 1 Reports of the Inspector of Factories for the half year, October, 1856, p. 678 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION the products of the soil without parallel in the history of Eng- lish agriculture, plethoric rent-rolls of landlords, and growing wealth of the capitalist farmers. If, however, the price of labour- power had fallen, not to Is. 6d., the lowest possible point con- sistent with its new value, but to 2s. 8 1. In other words, piece-wage is lowered in the same proportion as the number of the pieces pro- duced in the same time rises, 4 and therefore as the working-time spent on the same piece falls. If I sell a quarter of corn for £3, and with this £3 buy clothes, the money, so far as I am concerned, is spent and done with. c, p. That supply once given, the material may rise or fall in value, or even be, as land and the sea, without any value in itself; but this will have no influence on the creation of value or on the variation in the quantity of value. He must begin by taking the la- bour-power as he finds it in the market, and consequently be sat- isfied with labour of such a kind as would be found in the period immediately preceding the rise of capitalists. In one day, e.g., must be weeded an extent of land, which, for this work, especially in maize plantations, needs twice as much time. But by means of the price that you pay for it each day, I must be able to reproduce it daily, and to sell it again. The whole series of thefts, outrages, and popu- lar misery, that accompanied the forcible expropriation of the people, from the last third of the 15th to the end of the 18th cen- tury, lead him merely to the comfortable conclusion: "The due by force, so that they now were cultivating widely extended domains, instead of isolated fields. It is no part of us as objects. The nominal wages rose in consequence part- ly of the bank-note depreciation, partly of a rise in the price of the primary means of subsistence independent of this deprecia- tion. c, p 88. THE GENERAL LAW OP CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 687 tunately, stood the chimney, a curved tube of clay and wood like an elephant's trunk. We see that only against its will and under the pressure of the LEGISLATION AGAINST THE EXPROPRIATED 741 masses did the English Parliament give up the laws against Strikes and Trades' Unions, after it had itself, for 500 years, held, with shameless egoism, the position of a permanent Trades' Union of the capitalists against the labourers. 50. work for them; and it would place such labourers, not in an abject or servile condition, but in such a state of easy and liberal dependence as all who know human nature, and its history, will allow to be necessary for their own comfort." 1 Sir F. A fen farmer, e.g., gave evidence before the Commission of Inquiry: "I farm 320 acres, all arable land. viii., c. 74.) 2 The phrase, "labouring poor," is found in English legislation from the moment when the class of wage-labourers becomes noticeable. 441, p. 648.) "What objection do you see to it?" "I think it is degrad- ing to the sex." (n. 37. Note top. The growth of so- cial capital is effected by the growth of many individual capi- tals. 1 It thus creates at the same time one of the material 1 Darwin in his epoch-making work on the origin of species, remarks, with reference to the natural organs of plants and animals, "So long as one and the same organ has different kinds of work to perform, a ground lor its changeability may possibly be found in this, that natural selection preserves or suppresses each small variation of form less carefully than if that organ were destined for one special purpose alone. When he had finished what is called a day's work, he had been on duty 14 hours 50 minutes. To no purpose. Only a few parts of the watch pass through several hands; and all these membra disjecta come togeth- er for the first time in the hand that binds them into one mechan- ical whole. The Committee be- lieve that any constant work beyond 12 hours a-day encroaches on the domestic and private life of the working-man, and so leads to disastrous moral results, interfering with each man's home, and the discharge of his family duties as a son, a brother, a husband, a father. 10, known as Sir John Hobhouse s Factory Act, it was forbidden to any owner of a cotton-spinning or weaving mill, or the father, son, or brother of such owner, to act as Justice of the Peace in any inquiries that concerned the Factory Act. So too r on the other hand, the revolution in cotton-spinning called forth the invention of the gin, for separating the seeds from 1 The power-loom was at first made chiefly of wood; in its improved mod- ern form it is made of iron. . Jacob doubts whether gold has ever been paid for at its full value. The factory system was therefore raised, in the natural course of things, on an inadequate foundation. It is . And am I to be allowed nothing in return for all this service?" Well, but has not the labourer rendered him the equivalent service of changing his cotton and spindle into yarn? The history of coinage during the middle ages and down into the 18th century, records the ever renewed confusion arising from this cause. There are 40,000 of them. One old woman was burnt to death in the flames of the hut, which she refused to leave. Soon he becomes a metayer, a half- farmer. The greater the amount of the payments concentrated, the less is this balance relatively to that amount, and the less is the mass of the means of payment in circula- tion. 2 Ure, I. 7.) CHANGES OF MAGNITUDE 527 day be lengthened by 2 hours and the price of labour-power re- main unaltered, the surplus-value increases both absolutely and relatively. of yarn, is, in its character of an article of utility, just as much the fabric of the spinner's labour, as the remainder of the same product, yet when viewed in this connexion, it does not contain, and has not absorbed any labour expended during the process of spinning. 2 1. 104.) "Le credit commer- cial a du commencer au moment ou l'ouvrier, premier artisan de la produc- tion, a pu, au moyen de ses economies, attendre le salaire de son travail jusqu' a la fin de la semaine, de la quinzaine, du mois, du trimestre, &.c." (Ch. Ga- nilh: "Des Systemes d'Econ. It is not the capitalist whose skin he tans. 1 If this revenue serve the capitalist only as a fund to provide for his consumption, and be spent as periodically as it is gained, then, cseteris paribus, simple reproduction will take place. We cling to the fact theoretically, as he does practically. 3 This is the official expression both in the factories and in the reports. Ben- nett, a large farmer, magistrate, poor-law guardian, and wage- regulator, was asked: "Has any proportion of the value of daily labour been made up to the labourers out of the poors' rate?" Answer: "Yes, it has; the weekly income of every family is made up to the gallon loaf (8 lbs. In the corvee the surplus-labour is accurately marked off from the necessary labour. If a definite quantity of la- bour, say thirty days, is requisite to build a house, the total 188 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION amount of labour incorporated in it is not altered by the fact that the work of the last day is done twenty-nine days later than that of the first. The working-day that has already been realised in a given value, must necessarily be a day of given length. The extreme forms of the system, its abuse in the "cru- el and incredible" extension of the working-day are naturally passed over in silence. m., 15 At breakfast time, 10 At dinner time 20 Five days— 300 minutes, 60 On Saturday before 6 a. 148. G. I am always very much tired when I have done at night. The titanic advance of production— the latter half of the 20 years' period again far surpassing the former— has been already pointed out sufficiently in Part IV. c, preface. Simultaneously, with the differ- entiation of the instruments of labour, the industries that produce these instruments, become more and more differentiated. We cannot tell from the mere look of a piece of money, for what particular com- modity it has been exchanged. And the history of this, their expropriation, is written in the annals of mankind in letters of blood and fire. I have four horsemen lodging about. t.i., pp. It will be noted that, just like Bankes, this "low church pope," this head of English pietists, pockets a great part of the miserable wages of the labourers under the pretext of house-rent: — FIRST VILLAGE a S-i -o O) Si • eekly e of hole y. 386 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION hammers are an invention of Nasmyth, and there is one that weighs over 6 tons and strikes with a vertical fall of 7 feet, on an anvil weighing 36 tons. And this mode of payment tends in its turn to maintain the ancient form of production. This change in the technical composition of capital, this growth in the mass of means of production, as compared with the mass of the labour-power that vivifies them, is reflected again in its value-composition, by the increase of the constant consti- tuent of capital at the expense of its variable constituent. 1836, p. the gross; in 1830 they were supplied by manufacture at 8s., and today the factory system supplies them to the trade at from 2s. His favourites received contracts under conditions whereby they, cleverer than 1 William Howitt: "Colonisation and Christianity: A Popular History of the Treatment of the Natives by the Europeans in all their Colonies." London, 1838, p. But assume that the duration of the labour necessary for the production of a coat becomes doubled or halved. As measure of value, and as standard of price, money has two entirely distinct functions to perform. I call the former the value-composition, the latter the technical composition of capital. In indus- tries not under the Act, the views of Mr. J. Similarly the distinction between the exchange-value of labour-power, and the sum of the necessaries of life into which this value is converted, now re-appears as the distinction between nominal and real wages. Ounces 28.95 29.63 25.55 24.53 21.24 17.73 Ounces 150.06 152.91 114.49 162.06 100.83 118.06 Ounces 4.68 4.52 3.94 4.23 3.12 3.29 Ounces 183.69 187.06 143.98 190.82 125.19 139.08 5 The general result of the inquiry by the medical commission of 1863, on the food of the lowest fed classes, is already known 1 "Report of the Commissioners ... It steals the time required for the consumption of fresh air and sunlight. In Modern Industry man succeeded for the first time in making the product of his past labour work on a large scale gratuitously, like the forces of Nature. They hurried at once to his house and assassinated him, to "abstain" from the payment of £21,875, the price of his treason. 117, 118. The supply of wage-labour, he complains, is neither constant, nor regular, nor sufficient. Added to this is the injurious effect of drains, privies, decomposing substances, and other filth usual in the purlieus of the smaller cottages." With regard to space: "In one lace-school 18 girls and a mistress, 35 cubic feet to each person; in another, where the smell \ was unbearable, 18 persons and 24y cubic feet per head. At this moment, while English workmen with their wives and children are dying of cold and hunger, there are mil- lions of English gold— the produce of English labour— being invested in Russian, Spanish, Italian, and other foreign enterprises." — Reynolds' Newspaper, January 20th, 1867. 22.) THE CONCEPT OP RELATIVE SURPLUS-VALUE 315 erto in treating of surplus-value, arising from a simple prolonga- tion of the working-day, we have assumed the mode of production to be given and invariable. It is this movement that converts it into capital. The habit of giving such orders becomes more frequent with the extension of railways and tele- graphs. When these 400 or 500 girls become colliers' wives, the men suffer greatly from this degradation, and it causes them to leave their homes and drink." (n. . ("Reports of Insp. Every troop that emigrates one year, draws an- other after it the next. So here: "The capital itself in the long run becomes entirely wages, and when replaced by the sale of produce becomes wages again." CONVERSION OP SURPLUS-VALUE INTO CAPITAL 591 bearings of the facts. If we now consider the completed metamorphosis of a com- modity, as a whole, it appears in the first place, that it is made up of two opposite and complementary movements, C — M and M — G. Thus England is at present experiencing, not only in the colossal industry of making wear- ing apparel, but in most of the other trades mentioned above, the conversion of manufacture, of handicrafts, and of domestic work into the factory system, after each of those forms of production, totally changed and disorganised under the influence of modern industry, has long ago reproduced, and even overdone, all the horrors of the factory system, without participating in any of the elements of social progress it contains. On the eve of the crisis, the bourgeois, with the self-sufficiency that springs from intoxicating prosperity, declares money to be a vain imagination. They soon "cease ... But because this concrete labour, tailoring in our case, ranks as, and is directly identified with, undifferentiated human la- bour, it also ranks as identical with any other sort of labour, and therefore with that embodied in the linen. THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 683 of eviction .... Ces exces de veille et de travail usent la nature humaine, et de la vien qu' homines et femmes vieillissent beaucoup plutot dans les campagnes que dans les villes." (Mirabeau, 1. The use of my labour-power and the spo- liation of it are quite different things. In the weaving-room, where a vast number of persons are employed, and principally females . 2 "The course of trade being thus turned, from exchanging of goods for goods, or delivering and taking, to selling and paying, all the bargains ... Exchange does not create the differences between the spheres of production, but brings what are already different into relation, and thus con- verts them into more or less inter-dependent branches of the collec- tive production of an enlarged society. Value is independent of the particular use-value by which it is borne, but it must be embodied in a use-value of some kind. . This theory implies that the £1,500 worth of means of sub- sistence was capital that was being expanded by the labour of the 50 men discharged. 91. On the contrary, such an equation merely says that 20 yards of linen are nothing else than 20 yards of linen, a definite quantity of the use-value linen. Aussi le paysan se couche-t-il en hiver a minuit, une heure, et se leve a cinq ou six; ou bien il se couche a neuf, et se leve a deux, et cela tous les jours de la vie si ce n'est le dimanche. Hence, in answer to Proudhon's phrase; "Le travail est dit valoir, non pas en tant que marchandise lui-meme, mais en vue des valeurs qu'on suppose renfermees puissancielle- ment en lui. Thus is it with Wakefield. Instead of paying for the labour, he only pays the value of the labour-power employed; therefore, the limit to his using a machine is fixed by the difference between the value of the machine and the value of the labour-power replaced by it. 2 Oh! those heathens! They understood, as the learned Bastiat, and before him the still wiser MacCulloch have discovered, noth- ing of Political Economy and Christianity. He reported, that from a hygienic point of view, and apart from the banish- ment of the operatives from the factory atmosphere, the crisis had several advantages. 22.) 551 CHAPTER XXI PIECE-WAGES Wages by the piece are nothing else than a converted form of wages by time, just as wages by time are a converted form of the value or price of labour-power. 2 worth of cotton spun, and 2-~- lbs. It is also a power inimical to him, and as such capi- tal proclaims it from the roof tops and as such makes use of it. I believe that in many cases they would act very partially indeed, and that it ought not to be in their hands to do so, where men's lives are at stake." (n. In my "Misere de la Philosophic" I have sufficiently explained the historical con- nexion between Ferguson, A. The passion of capital for an unlimited and reckless extension of the working-day, is first gratified in the industries earliest revolutionised by water-power, steam, and machinery, in those first creations of the modern mode of production, cot- ton, wool, flax, and silk spinning, and weaving. 101. 2 The insufficiency of food among the agricultural labourers, fell, as a rule, chiefly on the women and children, for "the man must eat to do his work." Still greater penury ravaged the town-workers examined. Earl Shaftesbury, then Lord Ashley, was commander-in-chief in the aristocratic, philanthropic, anti-factory campaign. He gives 6 kinds of adulteration of sugar, 9 of olive oil, 10 of nutter, 12 of salt, 19 of milk, 20 of bread, 23 of brandy, 24 of meal, 28 of chocolate, 30 of wine, 32 of coffee, etc. Then the masters exclaim with one voice: "The factory operatives should keep in wholesome remembrance the fact that theirs is really alow species of skilled labour; and that there is none which is more easily acquired, or of its quality more amply remunerated, or which, by a short training of the least expert, can be more quickly, as well as abundantly, acquired.... This has actually occurred in the last Colony founded by Englishmen— the Swan River Settlement— where a great mass of capital, of seeds, imple- ments, and cattle, has perished for want of labourers to use it, and where no settler has preserved much more capital than he can employ with his own hands." 2 We have seen that the expropriation of the mass of the people from the soil forms the basis of the capitalist mode of production. On the other hand, there is no difference between forms G and D, except that, in the latter, gold has assumed the equivalent form in the place of linen. II., p. Thus the capitalist receives in return for his advance of the price of the labour-power, a product of the same price. Thorold Rogers. In fact this kind of so- phistry knows better than Protagoras how to make white black, and black white, and better than the Eleatics how to demon- strate ad oculos that everything is only appearance. When machinery is first 1 "Occasion . Within a family, 2 and after further development within a tribe, there springs up naturally a division of labour, caused by differences of sex and age, a division that is consequently based on a purely physiological foundation, which division enlarges its materials by the expansion of the community, by the increase of population, and more especially, by the conflicts between differ- ent tribes, and the subjugation of one tribe by another. Hence the velocity of the currency of money is measured by the number of moves made by a given piece of money in a given time. when he was 7 years old I used to carry him on my back to and fro through the snow, and he used to have 16 hours a day ... Linguet's hypoth- esis that the patrician creditors from time to time prepared, beyond the Tiber, banquets of debtors' flesh, may remain as undecided as that of Daumer on the Christian Eucharist. The sooner it is over — the sooner Ireland becomes a grazing coun- try, with the comparatively thin population which a grazing country re- quires, the better for all classes." The English Corn Laws of 1815 secured Ire- land the monopoly of the free importation of corn into Great Britain. 48, 56. This is the first negation of individual private property, as founded on the labour of the proprietor. This control appears, therefore, during the first half of the nineteenth century simply as exceptional legislation. A considerable number of the operatives must therefore be in very narrow cir- cumstances; many, it is to be feared, in debt; so that it might fairly have been presumed that at the present time they would prefer working the longer time, in order to make up for past losses, perhaps to pay off debts, or get their furniture out of pawn, or replace that sold, or to get a new supply of clothes for them- selves and their families." 1 The manufacturers tried to aggravate the natural effect of these circumstances by a general reduction of wages by 10%. The different national uniforms worn at home by gold and silver as coins, and doffed again in the market of the world, indi- cate the separation between the internal or national spheres of the circulation of commodities, and their universal sphere. It is not, therefore, a ques- tion of measuring the value of the piece by the working-time incor- porated in it, but on the contrary of measuring the working-time the labourer has expended, by the number of pieces he has pro- 1 How the existence, side by side and simultaneously, of these two forms of wage favours the masters' cheating: "A factory employs 400 people, the half of which work by the piece, and have a direct interest in working longer hours. The colonial system with its maritime trade and commercial wars served as a forcing-house for it. 197,343,655 lbs. 1 Sir James Steuart also understands machinery quite in this sense. The labourers of the towns were driven en masse into the country, and gave an impulse, never before seen, to the petite culture, carried on in the form of gardening. What does this equation tell us? Let the Government put upon the virgin soil an artificial price, independent of the law of supply and demand, a price that compels the immigrant to work a long time for wages before he can earn enough money to buy land, and turn himself into an independent peasant. The two other days I have been here at 6 a. 3, n. 141.) [Added in the 4th German edition. 1 Again, money functions as a means of circulation only because in it the values of commodities have independent reality. The general public, who, simultaneously with the retar- dation of the currency, see money appear and disappear less fre- quently at the periphery of circulation, naturally attribute this retardation to a quantitative deficiency in the circulating medium. Petty, "Political Anatomy of Ireland, Verbum Sapienti," 1672, Ed. 1691, p. That the workman moreover really does expend more labour-power, is ensured by the mode in which the capitalist pays him. However, there is a great difference in the way the two metals occur in the quartz lodes. . That part of the Act of 1884 which was framed for securing uni- formity in the hours of work, ... ii., p. You see then, your assertion, that the workman produces, in the last hour but one, the value of his wages, and in the last hour your net profit, amounts to no more than this, that in the yarn produced by him in 2 working-hours, whether they are the 2 first or the 2 last hours of the working-day, in that yarn, there are incorporated 11 y working-hours, or just a whole day's work, i.e., two hours of his own work and 9y hours - 3 of other people's. Manufacture, therefore, develops a hierarchy of labour-powers, to which there corresponds a scale of wages. 1. Econ.," Lond. What is really wonderful is the healthy integrity of character, he has, in great part, retained. Rep., 1864, pp. By the general law of value, if the value of 40 lbs. . 55.) That such a question should furnish the mate- rial of serious controversy, shows plainly how capitalist production acts on the brain-functions of capitalists and their retainers. . TWELVE HOUSES IN LANGTOFT. Just as in the simple circu- lation of commodities the double change of place of the same piece of money effects its passage from one hand into another, so here the double change of place of the same commodity brings about the reflux of the money to its point of departure. 44. Their evidence is to be found in the appendix to the Factory Reports for the half-year endi ng October 1848. The bills granted or credits opened, to-day, need have no resemblance whatever, either in quantity, amount, or duration, to those granted or entered upon to-morrow .or next day; nay, many of to-day's bills, and credits, when due, fall in with a mass of liabil- ities whose origins traverse a range of antecedent dates altogether indefinite, bills at 12, 6, 3 months or 1 often aggregating together to swell the common liabilities of one particular day..." ("The Currency Theory Reviewed; in a Letter to the Scottish people." By a Banker in England. d. Comm. Hence, fifteen shillings is an adequate price for the 10 lbs. p. Otherwise the spinner would be found to spend more time in producing a pound of yarn than is socially necessary, in which case the excess of time would create neither value nor money. Evi- dence, pp. Look at it,' she said, almost fiercely,, bringing out a bank-book with all its well-kept entries of money paid in, and money taken out, so that we could see how the little fortune had begun with the first five shilling deposit, and had grown by little and little to be twenty pounds, and how it had melted down again till the sum in hand got from pounds to shillings, and the last entry made the book as worthless as a blank sheet. Econ.," 2nd Ed., Lond., 1836, p. Bedroom: 8 ft. 64. 722.) "Have you ever heard of any workman objecting to employ a boy between 10 and 12, who could not write or read?" "It is not left to men's option." (n. This practice goes through all the western part of Wiltshire, and, I believe, throughout the country." 2 "For years," exclaims a bourgeois author of that time, "they (the farmers) have degraded a respectable class of their countrymen, by forcing them to have recourse to the workhouse .... Leonard Hor- ner reports, "Having endeavoured to enforce the Act . "Well," said Dr. G., "we have got our Poor Law and it is a great instrument for giving the victory to the landlords. Quantity Exported, 1805. Parry, M. If the quantitative extension induces qualitative change, then the rate of profit on the larger capital rises simultaneously." — F. 2 In glove-making and other industries where the condition of the work- people is hardly distinguishable from that of paupers, this does not occur. Only such products can become commodities with regard to each other, as result from different kinds of labour, each kind being carried on independ- ently and for the account of private individuals. "On one occasion, on visiting a place called a school, from which certificates of school attendance had issued, I was so struck with the ignorance of the master, that I said to him: 'Pray, sir, can you read?' His reply was: 'Aye, sum- mat!' and as a justification of his right to grant certificates, he added: *At any rate, I am before my scholars.' The inspectors, when the Bill of 1844 was in preparation, did not fail to represent the disgraceful state of the places called schools, certificates from which they were obliged to admit as a compliance with the laws, but they were successful only in obtaining thus much, that since the passing of the Act of 1844, the figures in the school certificate must be filled up in the handwriting of the schoolmaster, who must also sign his Christian and surname in full." 2 Sir John Kin- caid, factory inspector for Scotland, relates experiences of the same kind. Thus it became possible to produce the forms of the individual parts of machinery "with a degree of ease, accuracy, and speed, that no accumulated experience of the hand of the most skilled workman could give." 1 If we now fix our attention on that portion of the machinery employed in the construction of machines, which constitutes the operating tool, we find the manual implements re-appearing, but on a cyclopean scale. In truth, Adam Smith breaks his investigation off, just where its difficulties begin. 5.) The book-binding trade in the city of London employs very many young girls from 14 to 15 years old, and that under indentures which pre- scribe certain definite hours of labour. seront declarees inconsti- tutionnelles, attentatoires a la liberte et a la declaration des droits de Thomme, &c"; felony, therefore, as in the old labour-statutes. This same Tory, moreover, admits that "Acts of Parliament regulating wages, but against the labourer and in favour of the master, lasted for the long period of 464 years. In consequence of the cotton famine, it grew in the years 1863 and 1864 to 1",079,382 and 1,014,978. i., p. In both cases the value of labour-power falls. We have shown that surplus-value cannot be created by cir- culation, and, therefore, that in its formation, something must take place in the background, which is not apparent in the circulation itself. M. * "In the early days of textile manufactures, the locality of the factory depended upon the existence of a stream having a sufficient fall to turn a water-wheel; and, although the establishment of the water-mills was the com- mencement of the breaking up of the domestic system of manufacture, yet the mills necessarily situated upon streams, and frequently at consider- able distances the one from the other, formed part of a rural, rather than an urban system; and it was not until the introduction of the steam-power as a substitute for the stream that factories were congregated in towns, and localities where the coal and water required for the production of steam were found in sufficient quantities. Suppose the price of cotton to be one day sixpence a pound, and the next day, in consequence of a failure of the cotton crop, a shilling a pound. On a closer examination of the working machine proper, we find in it, as a general rule, though often, no doubt, under very altered forms, the apparatus and tools used by, the handicraftsman or manufacturing workman; with this difference, that instead of being human implements, they are the implements of a mechanism, or mechanical implements. 52. c, p. c, p. of coffee 1 quarter of corn L =20 yards of linen 2 ounces of gold */ 2 a ton of iron x com. Rep. Accumulation and the concentration accompanying it are, therefore, not only scattered over many points, but the increase of each functioning capital is thwarted by the formation of new and the sub-division of old capitals. c, p. Why, this Will lug your priests and servants from your sides; Pluck stout men's pillows from below their heads; This yellow slave Will knit and break religions; bless the accurs'd; Make the hoar leprosy ador'd; place thieves, And give them title, knee and approbation, With senators on the bench; this is it, That makes the wappen'd widow wed again: ... In some cases night-work, by relays, is carried on incessantly through the whole week, usually from Sun- day night until midnight of the following Saturday. Year ending April 5th, 1865. Hence an object may have a price without having value. EXPORT OF WOOL FROM AUSTRALIA TO GREAT BRITAIN. Instead, therefore, of proving that, when machinery frees the workman from his means of subsistence, it simultaneously converts those means into capital for his further employment, our apologists, with their cut-and-dried law of supply and demand, prove, on the contrary, that machinery throws workmen on the streets, not only in that branch of production in which it is in- troduced, but also in those branches in which it is not introduced. Exclusion of money from circulation would also exclude absolutely its self-expansion as capital, while accumulation of a hoard in the shape of commodities would be sheer tomfoolery. . It is now very generally combed in the factory, and hand-labour is supersed- ed, except in some particular kinds of work, in which hand-combed wool is still preferred. They are consumed from time to time, and their value re-appears in that new vigour imparted to his body and mind, forming fresh capital, to be employed again in the work of production." (F. But coats and linen, like every other element of material wealth that is not the spontaneous produce of Nature, must invariably owe their existence to a special productive activ- ity, exercised with a definite aim, an activity that appropriates particular nature-given materials to particular human wants. 18. m. If, however, we bear in mind that the value of commodities has a purely social reality, and that they acquire this reality only in so far as they are expressions or em- bodiments of one identical social substance, viz., human labour, it follows as a matter of course, that value can only manifest itself in the social relation of commodity to commodity. SECTION 3.— SENIOR'S "LAST HOUR" One fine morning, in the year 1836, Nassau W. The weight of gold fixed upon as the standard of prices, deviates from the weight that serves as the circulating medium, and the "Zur Kritik, &c," pp. Hence, the capitalist who applies the improved method of production, appro- priates to surplus-labour a greater portion of the working-day, than the other capitalists in the same trade. This course constitutes its currency (cours de la monnaie). M. For, again and again in phrases so uniform that they seem stereotyped, reporters on the spread of epidemic disease in rural districts, have insisted on the extreme importance of that over-crowding, as an influ- ence which renders it a quite hopeless task, to attempt the limit- ing of any infection which is introduced. The person who is a seller in the first transaction thus becomes a buyer in the second, in which a third commodity- owner appears on the scene as a seller. 2 "Of all the instruments of the farmers' trade, the labour of man ... Heat from 80° to 90° for linens, and 100° and up- wards for cambrics. So also, when based on these methods, do the cheapening of commodities and capitalist exploitation in general. Instead of one exchange- value, the wheat has, therefore, a great many. Classical economy always loved to conceive social capital as a fixed magnitude of a fixed degree of efficiency. The complete metamorphosis of a commodity, in its simplest form, implies four extremes, and three dramatis personae. may signify on the one hand an ounce weight of gold, and on the other, the value of a ton of iron, this reckoning name of money has been called its mint-price. The commodity owner can, by his labour, create value, but not self-expanding value. Its second change of place always expresses the second metamorphosis of the com- modity, its re-conversion from money. up to 8 o'clock the next morning ... 2 Dr. Letheby, Consulting Physician of the Board of Health, declared: "The minimum of air for each adult ought to be in a sleeping room 300, and in a dwelling room 500 cubic feet." Dr. Richardson', Senior Physician to one of the London Hospitals: "With needlewomen of all kinds, including THE WORKING -DAY 255 millinery establishments in London. 1821, p. x Necessary, as regards the la- bourer, because independent of the particular social form of his labour; necessary, as regards capital, and the world of capital- ists, because on the continued existence of the labourer depends their existence also. On these an employe on the North Staffordshire line comments: "Everyone knows the consequences that may occur if the driver and fireman of a locomotive engine are not continually on the look-out. While one particular commodity is going through its two transmutations in succession, from a com- modity into money and from money into another commodity, the owner of the commodity changes in succession his part from that of seller to that of buyer. . Moreover, he could not employ his journeymen in many other handicrafts than the one in which qe was a master. Let us make the opposite assumption, that the buyer has the privilege of purchasing commodities under their value. Its value is determined not by the makes many pairs, and none of those pairs could have been done without any part of the machine." ("Obs. M1 Horner, therefore, came to the conclusion that a reduction of the working-hours below twelve would ne- cessarily diminish production. The exact form of this process is therefore M — C — M', where M' = M + AM =the original sum advanced, plus an increment. There may be, e.g., originally 50 per cent, of a capital laid out in means of production, and 50 per cent, in labour-power; later on, with the development of the productivity of labour, 80 per cent, in means of production, 20 per cent, in labour-power, and so on. . 413, 419, 417.) 1 "On Whitsuntide, 1824," says Mr. Craig before the Commons' Com- mittee of 1826, "there was such an immense demand for notes upon the banks of Edinburgh, that by 11 o'clock they had not a note left in their custody. For proof, the following extract from the official accounts of an Irish workhouse. In simple co-operation, and even in that founded on di- vision of labour, the suppression of the isolated, by the collec- tive, workman still appears to be more or less accidental. Intensification of Labour The immoderate lengthening of the working-day, produced by machinery in the hands of capital, leads to a reaction on the part of society, the very sources of whose life are menaced; and, thence, to a normal working-day whose length is fixed by law. Steel-making is simply a pretext for surplus-value making. The oldest girl who is 12, minds the house. What distinguishes this form from that of the simple circulation of commodities, is the inverted order of succession of the two antithetical processes, sale and purchase. The children themselves call the elementary schools, "natural schools," to distinguish them from these blood-sucking institutions, in which they are kept at work simply to get through the task, generally 30 yards daily, prescribed by their half-starved mothers. c, p. Some of these gentlemen were accused of having kept at work 5 boys between 12 and 15 years of age, from 6a.m. on Friday to 4p.m. on the following Saturday, not allowing them any respite except for meals and one hour for sleep at midnight. In capitalist society spare time is acquired for one class by converting the whole life-time of the masses into labour-time. They applied to the * flesh agents,' as they are called. It teaches at the same time how to throw the excrements of the processes of production and consumption back again into the circle of the process of reproduction, and thus, without any previous outlay of capital, creates new matter for capital. So it is with the art of cooking." (Xen. 150, sqq. 8 I. THE BUYING AND SELLING OP LABOUR-POWER 173 labour, in other words, half a day's labour is requisite for the daily production of labour-power. Within the 24 hours of the natural day a man can expend only a definite quantity of his vital force. is a produc- tive consumer to the person who employs him, and to the State, but not, strictly speaking, to himself." (Malthus 1 "Definitions, &c," p. That which to-day, e.g., in the State of Massachusetts, until recently the freest State of the North-American Republic, has been proclaimed as the statutory limit of the labour of children under 12, was in England, even in the middle of the 17th century, the normal working-day of able-bodied artisans, robust labourers, athletic blacksmiths. 21.) 8 "There is also" (when the same number of men are employed by one farmer on 300 acres, instead of by ten farmers with 30 acres a piece) "an ad- vantage in the proportion of servants, which will not so easily be under- stood but by practical men; for it is natural to say, as 1 is to 4, so are 3 to 12: but this will not hold good in practice; for in harvest time and many other operations which require that kind of despatch by the throwing many hands together, the work is better and more expeditiously done: f. By a Farmer." London, 1773, p. In every country there is a certain average intensity of la- bour, below which the labour for the production of a commodity requires more than the socially necessary time, and therefore does 1 "It is not accurate to say that wages" (he deals here with their money expression) "are increased, because they purchase more of a cheaper article." (David Buchanan in his edition of Adam Smith's "Wealth," &c, 1814, Vol. But more characteristic than all this, was the revolu- tion that took place in the process of production at the expense of the workpeople. A Mecklen- burg. Whenever fiom an extraordinary demand for manufactures, labour grows scarce, the labour- ers feel their own consequence, and will make their masters feel it like- wise — it is amazing; but so depraved are the dispositions of these people, that in such cases a set of workmen have combined to distress the employer by idling a whole day together." ("Essay, &c," pp. The reproduction of the working-class carries with it the ac- cumulation of skill, that is handed down from one generation to another. of yarn, * it follows that in six hours he will convert 10 lbs. (Jean Law: "Considerations sur le numeraire et le commerce" in E. But if, on the one hand, variation of work at present imposes itself after the manner of an overpowering natural law, and with the blindly destructive ac- tion of a natural law that meets with resistance 2 at all points, Modern Industry, on the other hand, through its catastrophes imposes the necessity of recognising, as a fundamental law of pelled to face with sober senses his real conditions of life, and his relations with his kind." (F. 2 "The value or worth of a man, is as of all other things his price — that is to say, so much as would be given for the use of his power." (Th. Hobbes: "Leviathan" in Works, Ed Molesworth. It is this economic relation that determines the subject-matter comprised in each such juridical act. In the mines the work, inclusive of going and returning, usually last 14 or 15 hours, sometimes even from 3, 4 and 5 o'clock a. This rule also holds good in the case of the product that accrued to our capitalist, as the result of the labour- process carried on for him. Meanwhile, after a hearty laugh, he re-assumes his usual mien. 270 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION stock-jobbing swindle every one knows that some time or other the crash must come, but every one hopes that it may fall on the head of his neighbour, after he himself has caught the shower of gold and placed it in safety. The surplus of the total value of the product, over the sum of the values of its con- stituent factors, is the surplus of the expanded capital over the capital originally advanced. In the process we are now considering it is of extreme im- portance, that no more time be consumed in the work of trans- forming the cotton into yarn than is necessary under the given social conditions. 47.) "Capital (in factories) can never be employed in keeping the machinery in motion beyond a limited time, without certain injury to the health and morals of the labourers employed; and they are not in a position to protect themselves." (1. The latter can work only as Nature does, that is by changing the form of matter. The landlord in his capacity of mine-owner invites an industrial colony to labour on his estate, and then in his capacity of surface-owner makes it impossible that the labourers whom he collects, should find proper lodging where they must live. We will further assume that the wear and tear of the spindle, which, for our present purpose, may represent all other instruments of la- bour employed, amounts to the value of 2s. . The separation of the intellectual powers of produc- tion from the manual labour, and the conversion of those powers into the might of capital over labour, is, as we have already shown, finally completed by modern industry erected on the foundation of machinery. "Value"— (i.e., exchange-value) "is a property of things, riches"— (i.e., use-value) "of man. Ramsay: "An Essay on the Distribu- tion of Wealth." Edinburgh, 1836, p. Otherwise, however, so soon as the compulsory shortening of the hours of labour takes place. The categories of bourgeois economy consist of such like forms. How did the owner become possessed of it? But, as a matter of fact, sur- plus-value had a* that time, thanks to the increased intensity of labour, and to the prolongation of the working-day, increased both in absolute and relative magnitude. The rate of accu- mulation lessens; but with its lessening, the primary cause of that lessening vanishes, i.e., the disproportion between capital and exploitable labour-power. For simplicity's sake we shall henceforth account every kind of labour to be unskilled, simple labour; by this we do no more than save ourselves the trouble of making the reduction. The temperature of a bakehouse ranges from about 75 to upwards of 90 degrees, and in the smaller bakehouses approximates usually to the higher rather than to the lower degree of heat. Whether it attracts them or others, the effect on the general labour demand will be nil, if this capital is just sufficient to take out of the market as many la- bourers as the machines threw upon it. 4 In the wholesale boot and shoe trade of Leicester alone, there were in 1864, 800 sewing-machines already in use. When once a commodity has found a resting-place, where it can serve as a use-value, it falls out of the sphere of ex- change into that of consumption. c, p. Half a window, with glass and frame, had gone the way of all flesh. In Septem- ber, 1864, Dr. Simon reports that the Chairman of the Nuisances Removal Committee of the parish of Sevenoaks sent the following denunciation to Sir George Grey, Home Secretary: — "Small-pox cases were rarely heard of in this parish until about twelve months ago. As the national debt finds its support in the public revenue, which must cover the yearly payments for interest, &c, the modern system of taxation was the necessary complement of the system of national loans. It becomes evident, in the period of Modern Industry, that these implements, even under their form of manual tools, are already machines. three nights, and till 9 p. The total capital of the Republic was probably more important than that of all the rest of Europe put together." Giilich forgets to add that by 1648, the people of Holland were more over-worked, poorer and more brutally oppressed than those of all the rest of Europe put together. 18,364 . Say, who imagines that machines render the "service" of creating value which forms a part ol "profits." 2 A horse power is equal to a force of 33,000 loot pounds per minute, i.e., to a force that raises 33,000 pounds one foot in a minute or one pound 33,000 feet. 31, 32.) Without noticing any other oddities, it suffices to observe, that what re-appears in the fresh vigour, is not the bread's price, but its blood-forming substances. The minimum number that any given capi- talist is bound to employ is here prescribed by the previously es- tablished division of labour. 596 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION by such a process, be far more curbed in than spurred on. . The demands of the new colonial markets could not be satisfied owing to the relatively small number of town operatives handed down from the middle ages, and the manufactures proper opened out new fields of production to the rural population, driven from the land by the dissolution of the feudal system. 133-134.) 3 "La privation que s'impose le capitaliste, en pretant (this euphemism used, for the purpose of identifying, according to the approved method of vulgar economy, the labourer who is exploited, with the industrial capi- talist who exploits, and to whom other capitalists lend money) ses instru- ments de production au travailleur, au lieu d'en consacrer la valeur a son pro- pre usage, en la transforment en objets d'utilite ou d'agrement." (G. While the shelter holds together, the labourer is per- mitted to rent it, and glad enough he will often be to do so, even at the price of decent lodging. . If, on the one hand, the workman be- comes adapted to the process, on the other, the process was pre- viously made suitable to the workman. 134. •2T g. Freytag.) 740 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION Parliament ordered that the wages of the Scotch miners should continue to be regulated by a statute of Elizabeth and two Scotch acts of 1661 and 1671. The production and circulation of commodi- ties are, however, phenomena that occur to a greater or less extent in modes of production the most diverse. At the end of every labour-process, we get a result that already existed in the imagination of the la- bourer at its commencement. I demand the normal working-day because I, like every other seller, demand the value of my commodity. In the first form, 20 yds. This latter composition is determined by the relation between the mass of the means of production employed, on the one hand, and the mass of labour necessary for their employment on the other. The moment was cleverly chosen. 8 Before his time, spinning machines, although very imperfect ones, had already been used, and Italy was probably the country of their first appear- ance. On this supposition then, the quantity of the medium of cir- MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OF COMMODITIES H9 culation is determined by the sum of the prices that have to be realised. Harrup also appointed a boy to announce the starting time by a whistle, which he often did before six o'clock in the morning: and if the hands were not all there at the moment the whistle ceased, the doors were closed, and those hands who were outside were fined: and as there was no clock on the premises, the unfortunate hands were at the mercy of the young Harrup-inspired time-keeper. 8 Since iron is one of the most important raw materials, let me here state that, in 1861, there were in England and Wales 125,771 operative iron foun- ders, of whom 123,430 were males, 2,341 females. . 1860.-16,574,345 lbs. This inversion has no existence for two out of the three persons who transact business together. It may, of course, happen that A and B make simultaneous purchases, the one from the oth- er; but such exceptional transactions are by no means the neces- sary result of the general conditions of the circulation of commodi- ties. 13. . a week. However use- ful a given kind of raw material, or a machine, or other means of production may be, though it may cost £150, or, say, 500 days' labour, yet it cannot, under any circumstances, add to the value of the product more than £150. c. I have only one la- bourer on my farm now. And yet, you believe that the production of wealth, which arises from the labour of the workpeople, consists in the augmentation of the exchange-value of their products." 1 The shortening of the working-day is, therefore, by no means what is aimed at, in capitalist production, when labour is econo- mised by increasing its productiveness. 3 If the English Regis- trar-General, therefore, rightly remarks: "The increase of farm- ers and farm-labourers, since 1801, bears no kind of proportion . c, p. Effects, in their turn, become causes, and the varying accidents of the whole process, which always reproduces its own conditions, take on the form of periodicity. It would enforce upon them regular and moderate hours; it would lead to their places of work being kept in a healthy and cleanly state; it would therefore husband and improve that store of physical strength on which their own well-being and that of the country so much depends; it would save the rising generation from that over- exertion at an early age which undermines their constitutions and leads to premature decay; finally, it would ensure them — at least up to the age of 13— the opportunity of receiving the elements of education, and would put an end to that utter igno- rance ... Nevertheless, in a given country, at a given period, the average quantity of the means of subsistence necessary for the labourer is practically known. The organised group, peculiar to manufacture, is replaced by the connexion between the head workman and his few assist- ants. It confines the field of action of this law within the limits absolutely convenient to the activity of exploitation and to the domination of. However little our written histories up to this time notice the development of material production, which is the basis of all social life, and therefore of all real history, yet prehistoric times have been classified in accordance with the results, not of so-called historical, but of materialistic investigations. 8 Later, it became a temporary necessity in the international competi- tive struggle. On his side the Professor has embodied the lec- ture he received from the Manchester manufacturers, in a pamphlet, entitled: "Letters on the Factory Act, as it affects the cotton manufacture." London, 1837. 756 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION thieving system formed one of the secret bases of the capital- wealth of Holland to whom Venice in her decadence lent large sums of money. "When a labourer," said Mr. Ashworth, a cotton magnate, 1 "It has been estimated, roughly, that the first individual of a newly- invented machine will cost about five times as much as the construction of the second." (Babbage, 1. On the one hand, the process of production incessant- ly converts material wealth into capital, into means of creating more wealth and means of enjoyment for the capitalist. A portion of the instruments of labour acquires this social charac- ter before the labour-process itself does so. That which on your side appears a spontaneous expansion of capital, is on mine extra expenditure of labour-power. Of all the classes, that stand face to face with the bourgeoisie to-day, the proletariat alone is a really revo- lutionary class. they were in many cases starved to the bone while flogged to their work and . 1 . . The data were given him by an English manager until recently employed there. France, one person to 14 spindles 28 37 46 49 50 50 55 Smaller States of Germany, 55 Great Britain, " " 74 Russia, Prussia, Bavaria, Austria, Belgium. viii., pp. Did I not supply him with the mate- rials, by means of which, and in which alone, his labour could be embodied? The seller has himself produced the commodities or represents their producer, but the buyer has to no less extent produced the commodities represented by his money, or represents their producer. Their business cannot wait the convenience of the workmen, for "in the various operations of singeing, washing, bleaching, mangling, calendering, and dyeing, none of them can be stopped at a given moment without risk of damage ... When one of our people leaves the mill, he renders useless a capital that has cost £100,000." * Only fancy! making "useless" for a single moment, a capital that has cost £100,000! It is, in truth, monstrous, that a single one of our people should ever leave the factory! The in- creased use of machinery, as Senior after the instruction he received from Ashworth clearly perceives, makes a constantly increasing lengthening of the working-day "desirable." 2 Machinery produces relative surplus-value; not only by di- rectly depreciating the value of labour-power, and by indirectly cheapening the same through cheapening the commodities that enter into its reproduction, but also, when it is first introduced sporadically into an industry, by converting the labour employed by the owner of that machinery, into labour of a higher degree and greater efficacy, by raising the social value of the article produced above its individual value, and thus enabling the capitalist to replace the value of a day's labour-power by a smaller portion of the value of a day's product. Vol. Not even excepting our philosopher, Christian Wolff, in no time and in no country has the most home- spun commonplace ever strutted about in so self-satisfied a way. Rep.," p. Labour-time continues to transmit as before 410 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION the same value to the total product, but this unchanged amount of exchange-value is spread over more use-values; hence the value of each single commodity sinks. Appropriation of Supplementary Labour-power by Capital. After the change it consists of £4,500 constant (£3,000 raw material and £1,500 machinery), and £1,500 variable capital. The form of piece-wages is just as irrational as that of time- wages. No child or young person shall be employed more than five hours before 1 p. One motive mechanism was now able to drive many machines at once. f but also managers, salesmen, messengers, warehousemen, packers, &c, in short everybody, except the owner of the factory himself. A horseman does an incendiary a great service, by helping him to rob on the highway, and pillage land and houses. Or perhaps Bastiat means, that a mode of production based on slavery is based on a system of plunder. Water Eaton. 532 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION From formulae II. . If the average time that (doing a reasonable amount of work) an average labourer can live, is 30 years, the value of my labour-power, which you pay me from 1 1 day to day is 5 ~ Q or , Q of its total value. Did they wait until, in consequence of this bril- liant remuneration, the agricultural labourers had so increased and multiplied that their wages must fall again, as prescribed by the dogmatic economic brain? 212 sqq.) Note to the second edition. One house, belonging to a fami- ly called Richardson, was of quite unapproachable beauty. What are set free are not only the labourers immediately turned out by the machines, but also their future substitutes in the rising genera- tion, and the additional contingent, that with the usual exten- sion of trade on the old basis would be regularly absorbed. The minders took away the sum of 6s. One of its main lines of busi- ness, therefore, from 1701-1776, is the lending out of enormous amounts of capital, especially to its great rival England. till 12 p. 2 The value of a commodity is expressed in its price before it goes into circulation, and is therefore a precedent condition of circulation, not its result. Melt it down again; there's no loss in it, for the coining costs the owner nothing. II., Lond., 1863), the number of people employed in coalmines in England and Wales, amounted to 246,613 of which 73,545 were under, and 173,067 were over 20 years. 2 The chief reason is: England is at one time chiefly a cultivator of corn, at another chiefly a breeder of cattle, in alternate periods, and with these the extent of peasant cultivation fluctuates. 2 Eden, 1. If, e.g., the neces- sary labour amounts to 6 hours daily, expressed in a quantum of gold=3 shillings, then 3s. "My attention," says an English factory inspector, "was drawn to an advertisement in the local paper of one of the most important manufacturing towns of my district, of which the fol- lowing is a copy: Wanted, 12 to 20 young persons, not younger than what can pass for 13 years. They were placed in every respect on the same footing as the young persons, their work-time limited to twelve hours, their night-labour forbidden, &c. 11.) 535 PART VI WAGES CHAPTER XIX TEE TRANSFORMATION OF THE VALUE (AND RESPECTIVELY THE PRICE) OF LABOUR-POWER INTO WAGES On the surface of bourgeois society the wage of the labourer appears as the price of labour, a certain quantity of money that is paid for a certain quantity of labour. A. The continuity of the movement is therefore kept up by the money alone, and 1 Even when the commodity is sold over and over again, a phenomenon that at present has no existence for us, it falls, when definitely sold for the last time, out of the sphere of circulation into that of consumption, where it serves either as means of subsistence or means of production. The total capital of Ireland outside agriculture, employed in industry and trade, accumulated during the last two decades slowly, and with great and constantly recurring fluctuations; so much the more rapidly did the concentration of its individual constituents develop. not £590 but £180. have been known for many years .... c, p. Com- pare, e.g. j the English factory legislation of our time with the 1 "But though the health of a population is so important a fact of the national capital, we are afraid it must be said that the class of employers of labour have not been the most forward to guard and cherish this treasure The consideration of the health of theoperatives was forced upon themill-own- ers." (Times, November 5th, 1861.) "The men of the West Riding became the clothiers of mankind ... Pet- ty, "Political Anatomy of Ireland," p. (11.) Wiltshire Stratton. But whether condition or con- sequence, the growing extent of the means of production, as com- pared with the labour-power incorporated with them, is an expres- sion of the growing productiveness of labour. 1 Morning Star, 23rd June, 1863.— The Times made use of the circumstance to defend the American slave-owners against Bright, &c. Legislation was terrified at this revolution. The portion of his day's labour devoted to this purpose, will be greater or less, in proportion to the value of the necessaries that he daily requires on an average, or, what amounts to the same thing, in proportion to the labour-time required on an average to produce them. It is the great merit of E. 129.) 2 "Rep. 21, 22 Cf like examples ibid. c, p. . c, p. The unit-measure for time-wages, the price of the working- hour, is the quotient of the value of a day's labour-power, divided by the number of hours of the average working-day. In speaking of payment of labour, instead of pay- ment of labour-power, I only talk your own slang. A bedroom in which were 4 adults and 4 children; 11 feet long, 9 feet broad, 6 feet 5 inches high at its highest part; another 11 feet 3 inches by 9 feet, 5 feet 10 inches high, sheltered 6 persons. A great deal of capital, which appears to-day in the United States without any certificate of birth, was yesterday, in England, the capitalised blood of children. "The gang-system is decidedly the cheapest for the farmer, and decidedly the worst for the chil- dren," says a farmer. The exchange of products, of the different materials in which the labour of society is embodied, forms here the basis of the movement. c, p. The following remarks will have to suffice. hunt down, curse and behead all usurers." (Martin Luther, 1. The law of capitalist production, that is at the bottom of the pretended "natural law of population," reduces itself simply to this: The correlation between accumulation of capital and rate of wages is nothing else than the correlation between the unpaid labour transformed into capital, and the additional paid labour necessary for the setting in motion of this additional capital. The workman must be in the factory at half past five. 4 On the motion of Mr. Gladstone, the House of Commons or- dered, on the 17th February, 1867, a return of the total quanti- ties of grain, corn, and flour, of all sorts, imported into, and exported from, the United Kingdom, between the years 1831 and 1866. Hence, on the introduction of the Factory Act into a given in- dustry, a period varying from six to eighteen months is fixed within which it is incumbent on the manufacturers to remove all technical impediments to the working of the Act. And those who have denounced the over-crowded state of our rural population have not been silent as to a further mischief. This observation as to the willingness to work over-time is especially applicable to the women employed as weavers and reelers." ("Rept. That is the simple and terrible fact. A superficial observation of this fact, namely, that in the equation of value, the equivalent figures exclusively as a simple quantity of some article, of some use-value, has misled Bailey, as also many others, both before and after him, into seeing, in the expression of value, merely a quantitative relation. In his "Sea Board Slave States," Olmsted tells us: "I am here shown tools that no man in his senses, with us, would allow a labourer, for whom he was paying wages, to be encumbered with; and the excessive weight and clumsi- ness of which, I would judge, would make work at least ten per cent greater than with those ordinarily used with us And I am assured that, in the careless and clumsy way they must be used by the slaves, anything lighter or less rude could not be furnished them with good economy, and that such tools as we constantly give our labourers and find our profit in giving them, would not last out a day in a Virginia cornfield— much lighter and THE LABOUR-PROCESS 197 We now see, that the difference between labour, considered on the one hand as producing utilities, and on the other hand, as creating value, a difference which we discovered by our anal- ysis of a commodity, resolves itself into a distinction between two aspects of the process of production. They were "sacred banks." With the Phoenicians, a trading people par excellence, money was the transmuted shape of everything. c, p. 754 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION ment, and murder, floated back to the mother-country and were there turned into capital. Hence, the diminished expenditure of labour in the house is accompanied by an increased expenditure of money. The absolute population here increases much more quickly than in the mother-country, because many labourers enter this world as ready-made adults, and yet the labour-market is always understocked. 1 Whilst the place of the independent yeoman was taken by tenants at will, small farmers on yearly leases, a servile rabble dependent on the pleasure of the landlords, the systematic rob- bery of the Communal lands helped especially, next to the theft of the State domains, to swell those large farms, that were called in the 18th century capital farms 2 or merchant farms, 3 and to "set free" the agricultural population as proletarians for manu- facturing industry. 247. 2 But the exploitation of these laws 1 Wood-working machines that are also capable of being employed on a small scale are mostly American inventions. In the first instance to one another." (1. They are most admirable as a temporary relief; but if they were constantly in action, effects of a similar kind would result from them, as from the population of a country being pushed to the very extreme limits of its food." (Malthus: "Inquiry into the Nature and Progress of Rent," Lond., 1815, p. If a working-day of 12 hours be embodied in six shillings, 1,200 such days will be embodied in 1,200 times 6 shillings. But 1 Under the rule of invariable equivalents commerce would be impos- sible. The property of the church formed the religious bulwark of the traditional conditions of landed property. He estimates them at £6,000 a year. As, in religion, man is governed by the products of his own brain, so in capitalistic production, he is governed by the products of his own hand. John Bright's assertion that 150 landlords own half of England, and 12 half the Scotch soil, has never been refuted. Productive power has reference, of course, only to labour of some useful concrete form, the efficacy of any special productive activity during a given time being de- pendent on its productiveness. They are no longer capital. the object of the former is something different from money, of the latter the augmenta- tion of money.... The "pleasant difficulties" thus self-created by the Bank of England, are well known. Some of the means of subsistence, such as food and fuel, are consumed daily, and a fresh supply must be provided daily. 2 In the agricultural as well as in the factory districts the consumption of opium among the grown-up labourers, both male and female, is extending daily. These commodities must then be thrown into circulation. We are told the workers wish it" (emigration). On the other hand, it is no less certain that the rise of the English woollen factories, together with the grad- ual conversion of arable land into sheep pasture, brought about the superfluity of agricultural labourers that led to their being driven in masses into the towns. Hence, the less the unit is subject to variation, so much the better does the standard of price fulfil its office. When looked at as crystals of this social substance, common to them all, they are — Values. 17. 2 "A principal cause of the increase of capital, during the war, proceeded from the greater exertions, and perhaps the greater privations of the labouring classes, the most numerous in every society. c, p. 8 1. But it never enters into Owen's head to pre-suppose the production of com- modities, and at the same time, by juggling with money, to try to evade the necessary conditions of that production. 78.) To economise what? Insp. A London manufacturer, who in other respects looks upon the compulsory regulation of the hours of labour as a protection for the workpeople against the manufacturers, and for the manufacturers themselves against the wholesale trade, states: "The pressure in our business is caused by the shippers, who want, e.g., to send the goods by sailing vessel so as to reach their destination at a given season, and at the same time want to pocket the difference in freight between a sailing vessel and a steamship, or who select the earlier of two steamships in order to be in the foreign market before their competitors." 3 "This could be obviated," says a manufacturer, "at the expense of an enlargement of the works under the pressure of a General Act of Parliament." 1. It was no longer a question of obtaining from him a certain quantity of useful products. From the indica- tions as to the condition of the markets of the world in 1860 and 1861, we see that the cotton famine came in the nick of time for the manufacturers, and was to some extent advanta- geous to them, a fact that was acknowledged in the reports of the Manchester Chamber of Commerce, proclaimed in Parliament by Palmerston and Derby, and confirmed by events. Clothed in a few dirty rags, the legs naked far above the knees, hair and face besmeared with dirt, they learn to treat all feelings of decency and of shame with contempt. . The sum of the values in circulation can clearly not be augmented by any change in their distribution, any more than the quantity of the precious metals in a country by a Jew selling a Queen Anne's farthing for a guinea. l.p. 222.) Lassalle in his note on this passage, p. The Roman slave was held by fetters: the wage-labourer is bound to his owner by invisible threads. Thus the villainies of the Venetian 1 :, 3i les Tartares inondaient l' Europe aujourd'hui, il faudrait bien des affaires pour leur t'aire entendre ce que c'est qu'un financier parmi nous.'* Montesquieu, "Esprit des lois," t. 8 C. 1860.-20,214,173 lbs. This is the special service that the capitalist expects from la- bour-power, and in this transaction he acts in accordance with the "eternal laws" of the exchange of commodities. 3 2 5 " 3. Domestic work, such as sewing and mending, must be replaced by the purchase of ready-made articles. Since the first metamorphosis of a commodity is at once a sale and a purchase, it is also an independent process in itself. 286 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION placed under a ban, under a virtual law of suspects. &c, for 30th April, 1860," p. Here, the process as a whole is examined objectively, in itself, that is to say, without regard to the question of its execu- tion by human hands, it is analysed into its constituent phases; and the problem, how to execute each detail process, and bind them all into a whole, is solved by the aid of machines, chemistry, &C 1 But, of course, in this case also, theory must be perfected by accumulated experience on a large scale. Just as a change in the value of the means of production, even after they have commenced to take a part in the labour- process, does not alter their character as constant capital, so, too, a change in the proportion of constant to variable capital does not affect the respective functions of these two kinds of capital. m., and leaves off a quarter of an hour (sometimes more, sometimes less) after 6 p. Every owner of a commodity wishes to part with it in exchange only for those commodities whose use-value satisfies some want claimed to regulate the composition and decomposition ol matter by means of the "eternal ideas," of "naturalite" and "aft'inite"? W. As a consequence of this there is a regular trade in the purchase of "fag-ends of leases." "Gentlemen in this business may be fairly expected to do as they do — get all they can from the tenants while they have them, and leave as little as they can for their successors." 4 The rents are weekly, and these gentlemen run no risk. But the capitalist now produces 24 articles, which he sells at tenpence a-piece, making twenty shillings in all. If new mines are opened in the neighbourhood, or old ones are again set working, the pressure increases. The product belongs exclusively to the capitalist, who sup- plied the raw "material and the necessaries of life; and this is a rigorous con- sequence of the law of appropriation, a law whose fundamental principle was the very opposite, namely, that every labourer has an exclusive right to the ownership of what he produces." (1. 39-71. c, Vol. 125.) 8 E.g., in the Scotch bleaching-works. part on the helpless condition of some groups of the working-class, a condi- tion that prevents them from exacting equally with the rest the value of their labour-power. But so soon as the series of metamorphoses is in- terrupted, so soon as sales are not supplemented by subsequent purchases, money ceases to be mobilised; it is transformed, as Boisgiuillebensays, from "meuble" into "immeuble," from mov- able into immovable, from coin into money. Mr. Redgrave tells us of self-acting minders (oper- atives who manage a pair of self-acting mules) "earning at the end of a fortnight's full work 8s. His calculation was practically confirmed in a surprising manner by its agree- ment with the miserable quantity of nourishment to which want had forced down the consumption of the cotton operatives. Suppose then, that by some inexplicable privilege, the seller is enabled to sell his commodities above their value, what is worth 100 for 110, in which case the price is nominally raised 10%. We now come to the period that follows the introduction ol the Ten Hours' Act in 1847 into the English cotton, woollen, silk, and flax mills. 1855.— 1 in 18. . 253. 'Certainly by all honest means it is,' we answer. But in so doing we should be applying standards entirely foreign to commodity production. The owner of labour-power is mortal. "Why," cries Mirabeau, "why go so far to seek the cause of the manufacturing glory of Saxony before the war? From this moment the labour of the individual producer acquires socially a two-fold character. une valeur? 2,906,274 No. 54,247 Acres. St. Mill "Principles of Pol Econ ," Lond 1868, pp 252-53 passim. 170.) An English econ- omist remarks upon the conjuring tricks of the same nature that appear in Say's "Lettres": "Those affected ways of talking make up in general that which M. 3 Whenever these hoards are strikingly above their average level, it is, with some exceptions, an indication of stagnation in the circulation of com- modities, of an interruption in the even flow of their metamor- phoses. . 132.) Sometimes an exceptionally soft-hearted land- lord relents at the solitude he has created. m., 15 40 minutes. After this mighty effort of thought, he triumphantly apostrophises Malthus in the words: "Telle est, monsieur, la doctrine bien liee, sans laquelle il est impossible, je le declare, d'expliquer les plus grandes difficultes de l'economie politique, et notamment, comment il se peut qu'une nation soit plus riche lorsque ses produits diminuent de valeur, quoique la richesse soit de la valeur." (1. on Saturday. If, by converting the little farmers into a body of men who must work for others, more labour is produced, it is an advantage which the nation" (to which, of course, the "con- verted" ones do not belong) "should wish for. of Insp. Once arrived at his destination, "Mr. Peel was left without a serv- ant to make his bed or fetch him water from the river." 4 Unhappy Mr. Peel who provided for everything except the export of English modes of production to Swan River! 1 Wakefield's tew glimpses on the subject of Modern Colonisation are fully anticipated by Mirabeau Pere, the physiocrat, and even much earlier by English economists. They became amphibious and lived, as an English author says, half on land and half on water, and withal only half on both. . History shows how the division of labour peculiar to manu- facture, strictly so called, acquires the best adapted form at first by experience, as it were behind the backs of the actors, and then, like the guild handicrafts, strives to hold fast that form when once found, and here and there succeeds in keeping it for centu- ries. ii., p. On the other hand, while extending the scale of production, it renders possible a relative contraction of the arena. THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 637 England. 1 The two phases, each inverse to the other, that make up the metamorphosis of a commodity constitute together a circular movement, a circuit: commodity-form, stripping off of this form, and return to the commodity-form. Centralisation of the means of production and socialisation of labour at last reach a point where they become incompatible with their capitalist integument. While prices fall, and capital is being displaced, the labourers employed in the production of nec- essary means of subsistence are in their turn "freed" from a part of their wages. 17, 862 and 17, 863.) 2 Ure, I. ... The Expanded Relative form of value The value of a single commodity, the linen, for example, is now expressed in terms of numberless other elements of the world of commodities. See "Des classes ouvrieres en France, pendant l'annee 1848. Provisions and Necessaries. At first, therefore, the difference is purely quantitative. It may be made either longer or shorter. Burke, 1. c, p. The two things must therefore be equal to a third, which in itself is neither the one nor the other. x The result, in which the phases of the process vanish, is the exchange of money for money, M— M. of yarn. c, p. But the same circum- stances which allow the capitalist in the long run to prolong the working-day, also allow him first, and compel him finally, to nomi- nally lower the price of labour, until the total price of the increased number of hours is lowered, and, therefore, the daily or week- ly wage. But if you consume 1 1 it in 10 years, you pay me daily 1Q95Q instead of^^-of its total value, i.e., only -^ of its daily value, and you rob me, therefore, 2 every day of -^ of the value of my commodity. 2 Towards the end of the 16th century, mortars and sieves were still used in France for pounding and washing ores. Daire I. 416 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION "The great improvements made in machines of every kind have raised their productive power very much. Every organ of sense is injured in an equal degree by artificial elevation of the temper-' ature, by the dust-laden atmosphere, by the deafening noise, not to mention danger to life and limb among the thickly crowd- ed machinery, which, with the regularity of the seasons, issues workman had engaged himself for 2 years in a steelworks. c, p. In fact we started from exchange-value, or the exchange relation of com- modities, in order to get at the value that lies hidden behind it. Its relative value may remain constant, although its value varies; and finally, simultaneous variations in the magnitude of value and in that of its relative expression by no means necessarily correspond in amount. Par M. &c, 30th April, 1864," p. All the English methods hitherto considered culminated in "clearing." As we saw in the picture of modern conditions given in a former chapter, where there are no more independent peasants to get rid of, the "clearing" of cottages begins; so that the agricultural labourers do not find on the soil cultivated by them even the spot necessary for their own housing. 1 their value, in discovering that form under which value becomes exchange- value. The life of modern industry becomes a series of periods of moderate ac- tivity, prosperity, over-production, crisis and stagnation. This relation is here one of equality, the rate being 100%. The function of money as the means of payment implies a contradiction without a terminus medius. The two earlier forms either express the value of each com- modity in terms of a single commodity of a different kind, or in a series of many such commodities. One thing, however, is clear — Nature does not produce on the one side owners of money or commodities, and on the other men possessing nothing but their own labour-power. p. But as it is phys- ically impossible to exploit the same individual labour-power constantly during the night as well as the day, to overcome this physical hindrance, an alternation becomes necessary between the workpeople whose powers are exhausted by day, and those who are used up by night. c. 31 , 32.) No wonder that, true to the laws of God and of Nature, he always sold himself in the best market. Asa matter of fact, the reader is already familiar with numerous instances given in the chapter on the working- day. Within the sphere of home circulation, there can be but one commodity which, by serving as a measure of value, becomes money. The starting-point of the development that gave rise to the wage-labourer as well' as to the capitalist, was the servitude of the labourer. . Each looks to himself only, and no one troubles himself about the rest, and just because they do so, do they all, in accordance with the pre- established harmony of things, or under the auspices of an all- shrewd providence, work together to their mutual advantage, for the common weal and in the interest of all. The question why this free labourer confronts him in the market, has no interest for the owner of money, who regards the labour-market as a branch of the general market for commodities. c, p. 2 1 The Labour Statutes, the like of which were enacted at the same time in France, the Netherlands, and elsewhere, were first formally repealed in England in 1813, long after the changes in methods of production had ren- dered them obsolete. until 1.30 in the afternoon, one set of children between 9 and 13, and from 1.30 p. They allege that numbers of the parents withdraw their children from the industry brought under the Act, in order to sell them where "freedom of labour" still rules, i.e., where chil- dren under 13 years are compelled to work like grown-up people, and therefore can be got rid of at a higher price. Thus, apart from the dearness of the machines made in this way, a circumstance that is ever present to the mind of the capitalist, the expansion of industries carried on by means of machinery, and the invasion by machinery of fresh branches of production, were dependent on the growth of a class of workmen, MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 383 who, owing to the almost artistic nature of their employment, could increase their numbers only gradually, and not by leaps and bounds. In order to put it on an equal footing with all other commodities in this respect, we should be obliged to equate it to itself as its own equivalent. c, Vol. I return to this in the 2nd volume, as well as to the Blue books that have appeared since 1867 on the position of the English land labourers. (And not only for others, without more. The law of gravity thus asserts itself when a house falls about our ears. 16.) 2 "The possessors of surplus-produce or capital." ("The Source and Remedy of the National Difficulties. In themselves money and commodities are no more capital than are the means of production and of subsistence. 282. The overpowering competi- tion crushes the weakest of the manual labourers. In the same way, if a variable capital of 3s., being the daily value of one labour-power, produce a daily surplus-value of 3s., a variable capital of 300s. This narrow technical basis excludes a really scientific analysis of any definite process of industrial production, since it is still a condition that each detail process gone through by the prod- uct must be capable of being done by hand and of forming, in its DIVISION OF LABOUR AND MANUFACTURE 339 way, a separate handicraft. The example of Limerick led to a retrogres- sion in Ennis and Tipperary. 174). The monopolies of salt, opium, betel and other commodities, were inexhaustible mines of wealth. Comm., II. 2 Different operations take, however, unequal periods, and yield therefore, in equal times unequal quantities of fractional products. They must, therefore, mutually recognise in each other the rights of private proprietors. Then one thousandth part of the value of the machine is daily transferred to the day's product. per lb. This connexion is originated by, and exists in, the circulation alone. ch. c, "First Preliminary Discourse," p 14. The money becomes petri- fied into a hoard, and the seller becomes a hoarder of money. At Nadby, over-crowded cot- tages generally, with only 2 bedrooms, belonging for the most part to the farmers. In Belgium, one and the same furnace serves for both processes. The workpeople had hitherto offered a passive, although inflexible and unremitting resistance. 123 4 It might be said that not only capital, but also labourers, in the shape of emigrants, are annually exported from England. This inequality of the sexes was partly remedied in 1861, when they numbered 98 males and 87 fe- males; increase in 10 years of 14 men and 33 women. 8 See "Rep. It is no uncommon thing for 4 or 5 wealthy graziers to engross a large enclosed lordship which was before in the hands of 20 or 30 farmers, and as many smaller tenants and proprietors. Not only accumulation, but the simple "conservation of a capital requires a constant effort to resist the temptation of consuming it." 4 The simple dictates of humanity therefore plainly enjoin the re- lease of the capitalist from this martyrdom and temptation, in the nence from working. Magnitude of value expresses a relation of social production, it expresses the connexion that necessarily exists between a cer- tain article and the portion of the total labour-time of society required to produce it. Ricardo never concerns himself about the origin of surplus- value. . "Why did he live here? 85, p. By means of his in- vention one negress was enabled to clean 100 lbs. The place of the slave-driver's lash is taken by the overlooker's book of penalties. 67. 3 The second kind of manufacture, its perfected form, pro- duces articles that go through connected phases of development, 1 In the year 1854 Geneva produced 80,000 watches, which is not one- fifth of the production in the Canton of Neufchatel. When an individual appropriates natural objects for his livelihood, no one controls him but himself. We," it goes on to say, "would ask if the practice of working over- time by a number of hands, is likely to create a good feeling between mas- ters and servants. It is enough that it forms the starting-point. . . The seller of labour-power, like the seller of any other commodity, realises its exchange-value, and parts with its use-value. V. The greater the social wealth, the functioning capital, the extent and energy of its growth, and, therefore, also the absolute mass of the proletariat and the productiveness of its labour, the greater is the industrial reserve army. If, for instance, a sum of £100 has this year been converted into capital, and produced a surplus-value of £20, it SIMPLE REPRODUCTION 567 must continue during next year, and subsequent years, to repeat the same operation. without coming irresistibly to the conclusion that such abuses of the power of parents and of employers can no longer be al- lowed to exist." 2 "The practice of boys working at all by day and night turns either in the usual course of things, or at pressing times, seems inevitably to open the door to their not unfrequently working unduly long hours. Right and "labour" were from all time the sole means of enrichment, the present year of course always excepted. . I have elsewhere examined thoroughly the Utopian idea of "labour-money" in a society founded on the production of commodities (1. Owen pre-supposes directly associated labour, a form of production that -is entirely inconsist- ent with the production of commodities. Finally, as is shown by modern "domestic industry," some intermediate forms are here and there reproduced in the background of Modern Industry, though their physiognomy is totally changed. The average daily pay for a man is 2s. . The manufac- turers attended at these offices, and selected such persons as they chose; when they had selected such persons as their 'wants required,' they gave instructions to have them forwarded to Man- chester, and they were sent, ticketed like bales of goods, by ca- nals, or with carriers, others tramping on the road, and many of them were found on the way lost and half-starved. 468 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION within a circle of 80 miles radius from Nottingham. If from the total population of 18,000,000 living at the time when he wrote, we deduct 1,000,000 for the "genteel population," and 1,500,000 for paupers, vagrants, criminals, prostitutes, &c, and 4,650,000 who compose the mid- dle-class, there remain the above mentioned 11,000,000. Com. So far as it has value, it represents no more than a definite quantity of the average labour of society incorporated in it. Al! fixed, -tast-irozen relations, with their train of ancient and venerable prejudices and opinions, are swept away, all new formed ones become antiquated before they can ossify. The following table shows the movement of the exports: 1 "Census, &.c," 1. Owing to the previous adjustment of several items it is very imperfect; nevertheless for our purpose it is sufficient. Therefore is there, on this earth, no greater enemy of man (aher the devil) than a gripe- money, and usurer, for he wants to be God over all men. ought the government then to work in opposition to this division of labour, and to hinder its natural course? It is, besides their real ignorance, their apologetic dread of a scientific analysis of value and surplus-value, and of obtaining a result, possibly not altogether palatable to the powers that be. If, therefore, in our historical sketch, on the one hand, modern industry; on the other, the labour of those who are physically and legally minors, play important parts, the former was to us only a special department, and the latte,r only a special- ly striking example of labour exploitation. In London there are two sorts of bakers, the "full priced," who sell bread at its full value, and the "undersellers," who sell it under its value. It was, there- fore, quite in order that the virgins, who, at the feast of the Goddess of Love, gave themselves up to strangers, should offer to the goddess the piece of money they received. 132 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION gold one can even get souls into Paradise." (Columbus in his letter from Jamaica, 1503.) Since gold does not disclose what has been transformed into it, everything, commodity or not, is convertible into gold. Although people do not look a gift-horse in the mouth, our friend does not frequent the market for the purpose of making presents. 112, squ. Lond., 1870, p. for costs. 3 . By E. c, p. "The adult operatives at this mill have been asked to work from 12 to 13 hours per day, while there are hundreds who are compelled to be idle who would willingly work partial time, in order to maintain their fami- lies and save their brethren from a premature grave through being over- worked... 294. (1. And into those wretched habitations (which, even if they adjoin the open country, have some of the worst features of the worst town residences) crowd the agricul- tural labourers of England. 306 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION the greatest possible mass of surplus-value. . I wish my own children could have some work as well as play to give variety to their schooling." ("Ch. Empl. In order that the surplus-labour may absorb the whole day (i.e., an average day of any week or year), the necessary la- bour must sink to zero. An Act of 1533 recites that some owners possess 24,000 sheep, and limits the number to be owned to 2,00c). 2 "Ch. Empl. 8 "Those were the very words used by the cotton manufacturers,' 1 I. 2 "The understandings of the greater part of men," says Adam Smith, "are necessarily formed by their ordinary employments. In our example this ratio is ^, which gives an increase of 100%. est devenu le bourreau de toutes choses." Finance is the "alambic, qui a fait evaporer une quantite effroyable de biens et de den- izes pour faire ce fatal precis." "L'argent declare la guerre a tout lc genre MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OP COMMODITIES 141 depends on conditions of production that are reproduced with the regularity of natural phenomena. This only we must not forget, that by the side of the newly-formed capital, the original capital continues to reproduce itself, and to produce surplus-value, and that this is also true of all accumulated capital, and the addition- al capital engendered by it. Let us now picture to ourselves, by way of change, a commu- nity of free individuals, earning on their work with the means of production in common, in which the labour-power of all the different individuals is consciously applied as the combined la- bour-power of the community. In order that a man may be able to sell commodities other than labour-power, he must of course have the means of produc- tion, as raw material, implements, &c. Apart from the degree of development, greater or less, in the form of social production, the productiveness of labour is fettered by physical conditions. The different spheres of production, it is true, con- stantly tend to an equilibrium: for, on the one hand, while each an enormous number and variety of industries contribute to the satisfaction of the wants of an ordinary labourer, is copied almost word for word from B. 8 A steel manufacturer who employs children in night-labour remarked: "It seems but natural that boys who work at night cannot sleep and get proper rest by day. 1 Various detail labourers are employed in this first stage, as also in the final one of removing the bottles from the drying furnace, sorting and packing them, &c. I, book 1., chapter 1., pp. 73.) THE WORKING-DAY 233 thus acquired the right to make the labourer work for him during one day. The tendency of capital is there unmistakably; but the facts themselves are still as isolated as the phe- nomena of two-headed children. Towns and manufactures will increase, because more will be driven to them in quest of places and employ- ment. 14,670,880 yds. such a one would have the whole world perish of hunger and thirst, misery and want, so far as in him lies, so that he may have all to himself, and every one may receive from him as from a God, and be his serf for ever. 20, note. 2 In a crisis, the antithesis between com- modities and their value-form, money, becomes heightened into an absolute contradiction. c, p. first spun. The rate of surplus-value is therefore an exact expression for the degree of exploitation of labour-power by capital, or of the labourer by the capitalist. They have proposed that we shall erect a prison in the parish, and then give notice to the neighbourhood, that if any persons are disposed to farm the poor of this parish, they do give in sealed proposals, on a certain day, of the lowest price at which they will take them off our hands; and that they will be authorised to refuse to any one un- less he be shut up in the aforesaid prison. i., London, 1836, p. The particular tracks pursued by the different species of coin in currency, run naturally into each other. He must therefore be popular with his sub- jects, and he binds them to himself by the charms of the gipsy life under his direction. From one standpoint, any distinction between absolute and relative surplus-value appears illusory. The whole of our analysis of the production of surplus-value shows the absurdity of this con- clusion, even if Carey himself had proved his premises, instead of, after his usual uncritical and superficial fashion, shuffling to and fro a confused mass of statistical materials. This work, the fruit of patient and diligent labour, contains in the two volumes that have so far appeared, only the period from 1259 to 1400. The second additional capital of £400 pre-supposes, on the contrary, only the previous accumulation of the £2,000, of which the £400 is the sur- plus-value capitalised. The labourer here is, to use a striking expression of the ancients, distinguishable only as instrumentum vocale, from an ani- mal as instrumentum semi-vocale, and from an implement as instrumentum mutum. The usual mode of procedure is gen- erally the reverse, and in the value-relation nothing is seen but the proportion between definite quantities of two different sorts of commodities that are considered equal to each other. Hence at one and the same time there is produced a two-fold result. the in- fluence of the Poor Law in its provisions concerning settlement and chargeability. At first, capital subordinates labour on the basis of the tech- nical conditions in which it historically finds it. In each case the value of the material of money, i.e., the value of the commodity that serves as the meas- ure of value, would have undergone a change, and therefore so, too, would the prices of commodities which express their values in money, and so, too, would the quantity of money current whose function it is to realise those prices. Ed. Daire. MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 431 Division of labour specialises this labour-power, by reducing it to skill in handling a particular tool. Smith.) This is even a specially wise arrangement of God, according to the gallant and witty Abbe Galiani. ed. For since, in this mode of production, the workman finds the instruments of labour existing independently of him as another man's property, economy in their use appears, with regard to him, to be a distinct operation, one that does not concern him, and which, therefore, has no con- nexion with the methods by which his own personal productiveness is increased. The shortness of the time allowed for the work is compensated for by the large mass of labour thrown upon the field of production at the decisive moment. 10.) "The higher wages, for getting adult males to work longer hours, are a temp- tation too strong to be resisted." ("Rept. 3,051,343 (5) Farms over 30, not over 50 acre3. And if I offered to explain to them the meritorious nature of my action in inverting the order of succession, they would probably point out to me that I was mistaken as to that order of succession, and that the whole transaction, instead of beginning with a purchase and ending with a sale, began, on the contrary, with CONTRADICTIONS IN THE FORMULA OF CAPITAL 157 a sale and was concluded with a purchase. The apparent correctness of their reasons will be best shown by the Lord Ashley, J. It must have its origin both in circulation and yet not in circulation. . Horner in "Reports, &c, for 31st Oct., 1857," pp. Our machine is always stopped for dinner. d. But in his middle- class he includes people that live on the interest of small investments, offi- cials, men of letters, artists, schoolmasters and the like, and in order to swell the number he also includes in these 4,650,000 the better paid portion of the factory operatives! The bricklayers, too, figure amongst them. Oct., 1862," P- 19.) MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 407 working-day, the rate of surplus-value is determined by the rela- tive duration of the necessary labour and of the surplus-labour in a day. An hundred pounds' worth of lead or iron, is of as great value as one hundred pounds' worth of silver or gold." 1 As use-values, commodities are, above all, of different qualities, 1 N. Taking all these points into consideration, we have come to the conviction that some legislative enactment is wanted." ("Children's Employment Comm." Rep. 48. Not less characteristic of the development of French society, generally, the fact, that Louis Philippe's law stood solitary among the all-em- icing mass of French laws, till the Revolution of 1848. In this way East India was compelled to pro- duce cotton, wool, hemp, jute, and indigo for Great Britain. 1 Capital: "portion fructifiante de la richesse accumulee ... and 2s. Since 1846 various sorts of machines have been introduced, which are now driven by steam. 38. The various parts of the work progress simultaneously. 104, § 67.) THE BUYING AND SELLING OF LABOUR-POWER 169 which his labour is incorporated, must be obliged to offer for sale as a commodity that very labour-power, which exists only in his living self. Hence, Manufacture begets, in every handicraft that it seizes upon, a class of so-called unskilled la- bourers, a class which handicraft industry strictly excluded. Since 1845 this manufacture has rapidly devel- oped in England, and has extended especially amongst the thickly populated parts of London as well as in Manchester, Birmingham, Liverpool, Bristol, Norwich, Newcastle and Glas- gow. Th. Thornton. THE WORKING-DAY 261 of whose operations, namely, iron and heavier steel work, goes on night and day by relays, states "that in the heavier steel work one or two boys are employed to a score or two men." Their con- cern employs upwards of 500 boys under 18, of whom about -^- or 170 are under the age of 13. During one the "labourer produces a value that is only equal to the value of his labour-power: he produces its equivalent. I., pp. MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 473 or of domestic industry, to the rent of the workrooms, x &c. there are mate- rialised the 12 hours' work done during the process itself. Whence then is to come the internal market for capital? I come at 6. Second: The part of social capital domiciled in each particular sphere of production is divided among many capitalists who face one another as independent commodity- producers competing with each other. The change in the form of that circulation stamps buyer and seller with this new die. 2 Besides the purely technical impediments that are removable by technical means, the irregular habits of the workpeople them- selves obstruct the regulation of the hours of labour. I.Employment in mines of boys of 10 years and upwards. "The device of King Henry VII.," says Bacon, in his "Essays, Civil and Moral," Essay 29, "was profound and admirable, in making farms and houses of husbandry of a stand- ard; that is, maintained with such a proportion of land unto them as may breed a subject to live in convenient plenty, and no servile condition, and to keep the plough in the hands of the owners and not mere hirelings." 2 What the capitalist system demanded was, on the other hand, a degraded and almost servile condition of the mass of the people, the transformation of them into mercen- aries, and of their means of labour into capital. Since the great mass of the Hindu population are peasants cultivating their land themselves, their products, their instruments of labour and means of subsistence never take "the shape of a fund saved from revenue, which fund has, therefore, gone through a previous proc- ess of accumulation." 2 On the other hand, the non-agricultural labourers in those provinces where the English rule has least- disturbed the old system, are directly employed by the mag- nates, to whom a portion of the agricultural surplus-product is ren- dered in the shape of tribute or rent. During the whole of the 14th and the greater part of the 15th cen- tury, there was one acre of pasture to 2, 3, and even 4 of arable land. Only buyer and seller, mutually independent, face each other in commodity production. In this way an abnormally low selling price of the commodity arises, at first sporadically, and becomes fixed by degrees; a lower selling price which henceforward becomes the constant basis of a miserable wage for an excessive working-time, as originally it was the product of these very circumstances. . "Legisla- tion is necessary for the prevention of death, in any form in which it can be prematurely inflicted, and certainly this (i.e., the factory method) must be viewed as a most cruel mode of inflicting it." That same "reformed" Parliament, which in its delicate con- sideration for the manufacturers, condemned children under 13, for years to come, to 72 hours of work per week in the Factory Hell, on the other hand, in the Emancipation Act, which also administered freedom drop by drop, forbade the planters, from the outset, to work any negro slave more than 45 hours a week. The value, or in other words, the quantity of human labour contained in a ton of iron, is expressed in imagination by such a quantity of the money- commodity as contains the same amount of labour as the iron. ." (n. Hence, the conditions of production, i. This form quickly disappears in England, to give place to the farmer proper, who makes his own capital breed by employing wage-labourers, and pays a part of the surplus-prod- uct, in money or in kind, to the landlord as rent. The problem and the means of solution arise simultane- ously. 3, erroneously makes gold a mere symbol of value. Polit." t. The number employed in iron, copper, lead, tin, and other mines of every description, was 319,222. d. Hence, one "nominal" horse-power may exert three, four, or even five "indicated" or "real" horse-powers. What is more to the one is less to the other, and vice versa. Then again, the labour-power itself must be of average efficacy. As the earth is his original larder, so too it is his original tool house. Diminution of the variable capital may therefore be compensated RATE AND MASS OF SURPLUS-VALUE 305 by a proportionate rise in the degree of exploitation of labour- power, or the decrease in the number of the labourers employed by a proportionate extension of the working-day. All the slave's labour appears as unpaid labour. Lastly, the quickness with which machine work is learnt by young people, does away with the necessity of bringing up for exclusive employment by machinery, a special class of oper- atives. Thus, the ex- panded form of relative value, or form B, now shows itself as the specific form of relative value for the equivalent commodity. The same interest, which compels the sycophant of capital, the political economist, in the mother-country, to pro- claim the theoretical identity of the capitalist mode of production with its contrary, that same interest compels him in the colonies to make a clean breast of it, and to proclaim aloud the antagonism 1 We treat here of real Colonies, virgin soils, colonised by free immi- grants. 27. 112. of Fact, for 31st Oct. Education, of course, they get none. We shall now lightly touch upon the relation between the division of labour in manufacture, 1 Dr. Ure, in his apotheosis of Modern Mechanical Industry, brings out the peculiar character of manufacture more sharply than previous econ- omists, who had not his polemical interest in the matter, and more sharply even than his contemporaries — Babbage, e.g., who, though much his superior as a mathematician and mechanician, treated mechanical industry from the standpoint of manufacture alone Ure says, "This appropriation ... Meyer has shown that the above acknowledgment by Marx wants restricting to some extent. From the last third of the 15th century he finds continually complaints, only inter- rupted at certain intervals, about the encroachment of capitalist farming in the country districts, and the progressive destruction of the peasantry. 2 The articles A and B in this case are not as yet commodities, but become so only by the act of barter. of yarn, then t^ ths of this value, or the 24s. Half the workmen ... A spinner treats spindles only as implements for spinning, and flax only as the material that he spins. Richard Jones." Hertford, 1852. Now we have seen how that portion of v the constant cap- ital which consists of the instruments of labour, transfers to the production only fraction of its value, while the remainder of that THE RATE OP SURPLUS-VALUE 213 value continues to reside in those instruments. In their turn, the varying phases of the industrial cycle recruit the surplus-popula- tion, and become one of the most energetic agents of its reproduc- tion. Both these factors, however, are excluded in the following inves- tigation. (Hegel, 1. In other cases an intermediate system 260 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION Let us now hear how capital itself regards this 24 hours' sys- tem. Other things being equal, his commodities can command a more extended market only by a diminution of their prices. On the other hand, it is only from this moment that the produce of labour universally becomes a commodity. 361, 364, 366, 368, 371, 375.) "One great object in summoning a jury is to have an impartial one, is it not?" "Yes, I should think so." "Do you think that the juries would be impartial if they were composed to a considerable extent of workmen?" "I cannot see any motive which the workmen would have to act partially . This is always the case when two owners of commodities buy from each other, and on the settling day the amounts mutually owing are equal and cancel each other. And from this original sin dates the poverty of the great majority that, despite all its labour, has up to now nothing to sell but itself, and the wealth of the few that increases constantly although they have long ceased to work. On the introduction of machinery the com- position of this capital becomes altered. Malheureusement pour l'espece humaine, ce n'est qu'une ressource contre la misere et non un moyen de bien-etre. 470.) 3 "L'Argent en (des denrees) est le signe." (V. For every 100 acres there is, on an average, scarcely one cottage. c. The English bourgeoisie acted for its own interest quite as wisely as did the Swedish bourgeoisie who, reversing the proc- ess, hand in hand with their economic allies, the peasantry, helped the kings in the forcible resumption of the Crown lands from the oligarchy. The labour-process is a process between things that the capitalist has purchased, things that have become his property. 4-5. Oct., 1863, p. c, p. The non- agricultural labourers of an Asiatic monarchy have little but then- individual bodily exertions to bring to the task, but their number is their strength, and the power of directing these masses gave rise 334 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION to the palaces and temples, the pyramids, and the armies of gi- gantic statues of which the remains astonish and perplex us. 36, sq. These estates were given away, sold at a ridiculous figure, or even annexed to private estates by direct seizure. The "amis du commerce" decided it to be genuine commercial soot, and non-suited the plaintiff farmer, who had in addition to pay the costs of the suit. 2 The reader will notice, that the word revenue is used in a double sense: first, to designate surplus-value so far as it is the fruit periodically yield- ed by capital; secondly, to designate the part of that fruit which is period- ically consumed by the capitalist, or added to the fund that supplies his private consumption I have retained this double meaning because it har- monises with the language of the English and French economists. there is plenty of air generally in the main courses, yet pains are not taken to get air into the workings where men are working." "Why do you not apply to the inspector?" "To tell the truth there are many men who are timid on that point; there have been cases of men being sacrificed and losing their employment in consequence of apply- ing to the inspector." "Why; is he a marked man for having com- plained?" "Yes." "And he finds it difficult to get employment in another mine?" "Yes." "Do you think the mines in your neigh- bourhood are sufficiently inspected to insure a compliance with the provisions of the Act?" "No; they are not inspected at all . Tailoring and weaving, though qualitatively different productive activities, are each a productive expenditure of human brains, nerves, and muscles, and in this sense are human labour. When business is brisk, the labour frequently lasts from 8 or even 6 o'clock in the morning till 10, 11, or 12 o'clock at night. Not long after there will come a demand for bullion to be exported again. Edinburgh, 1845, pp. 13. This is the negative side. H. The 18th century, however, did not yet recognise as fully as the 19th, the identity between national wealth and the poverty of the people. CO-OPERATION 335 ployers, appears to be a specific form of the capitalist process of production. c, pp. or 3d." ("Children's Employment Com., III. In the first phase, M — G, or the purchase, the money is changed into a com- modity. The contradiction is not more glaring than that other one that there is a complaint of the want of hands, while at the same time many thousands are out of work, because the division of labour chains them to a particular branch of industry. The class of wage-labourers, which arose in the latter half of the 14th century formed then and in the following cen- tury only a very small part of the population, well protected in its position by the independent peasant proprietary in the country and the guild-organisation in the town. I860.— 1 in 8. Whatever the value of labour- power may be, whether the working-time necessary for the main- tenance of the labourer is 2 or 10 hours, the total value that a la- bourer can produce, day in, day out, is always less than the value in which 24 hours of labour are embodied, less than 12s., if 12s. 3 In reality, the individual consumption of the labourer is unproductive as regards himself, for it reproduces noth- ing but the needy individual; it is productive to the capitalist and to the State, since it is the production of the power that creates their wealth. 31. 18.) North was himself one of the foremost merchants in the reign of Charles II. It is self-evident that, under these circumstances, the meagre comforts that Eden still found in the cottage of the agricultural labourer, had vanished by 1814. "We thus see," he pro- ceeds, "that profit arises, not from the incident of exchange, but from the productive power of labour; and the general profit of the country is always what the productive power of labour makes it, whether any exchange takes place or not. of Insp. c, p. Once discovered, the law of the deviation of the magnetic needle in the field of an electric current, or the law of the magnetisation of iron, around which an electric current circulates, cost never a penny. A surgeon officially appointed must certify their age. The industrial capitalists, these new potentates, had on their part not only to displace the guild masters of handicrafts, but also the feudal lords, the possessors of the sources of wealth. Our difficulty may perhaps have arisen from treating the actors as personifications instead of as individuals. What is the length of time dur- ing which capital may consume the labour-power whose daily value it buys? In the treatises, there- fore, of economists of the stamp of MacCulloch, Ure, Senior, and tutti quanti, we may read upon one page, that the labourer owes a debt of gratitude to capital for developing his productiveness, because the necessary labour-time is thereby shortened, and on the next page, that he must prove his gratitude by working in future for 15 hours instead of 10. . The quantity of air for each person under the circumstances just described corresponds to that which he would have if he were shut up in a box of 4 feet measuring each way, the whole night. Yet the coat itself, the body of the commodity, coat, is a mere use-value. By this means alone can he avoid renouncing his rights of ownership over it. In some cases they now allow an hour, or half an hour for dinner, insisting at the same time, that they are not bound to allow any part of the hour and a half in the course of the factory working-day." 2 The manu- facturers maintained therefore that the scrupulously strict pro- visions of the Act of 1844 with regard to meal-times only gave the operatives permission to eat and drink before coming into, and after leaving the factory— i.e., at home. But it no longer holds good for each member taken individually. of Pol. Freedom, because both buyer and seller of a commodity, say of labour-power, are constrained only by their own free will. . 48, note.) All honour to Mal- thus that he lays stress on the lengthening of the hours of labour, a fact to which he elsewhere in his pamphlet draws attention, while Ricardo and others, in face of the most notorious tacts, make invariability in the length of the working day the groundwork of all their investigations. In spite, therefore, of the greatly increased number of looms in 1862, compared with 1856, the total number of the workpeople employed decreased, and that of the children exploited increased. Bailey accuse Ricardo of con- verting exchange-value from something relative into something absolute. The a priori system on which the division of labour, within the workshop, is regularly carried out, becomes in the division of labour within the society, an a posteriori, nature-imposed necessity, controlling the lawless caprice of the producers, and perceptible in the baro- metrical fluctuations of the market-prices. Let the lat- ter be 12 hours, and the daily value of labour-power 3 shillings, the value of the product of 6 hours of labour. The needlemaker of the Nuremberg Guild was the corner- stone on which the English needle manufacture was raised. Assume that a capital G of £500 is made up of raw material, instruments of labour, &c. In this connexion we consider only its useful effect. With the abolition of the Corn Laws in 1846, this monopoly was suddenly removed. c, p. On the other hand, if a commodity be found to have assumed the univer- sal equivalent form (form G), this is only because and in so far as it has been excluded from the rest of all other commodities as their equivalent, and that by their own act. On the other hand, since the difference between the magnitudes of value is purely quantitative, the money-commodity must be susceptible of merely quantita^ tive differences, must therefore be divisible at will, and equally capable of being re-united. 12. These same rights remain in force both at the outset, when the product belongs to its producer, who, ex- changing equivalent for equivalent, can enrich himself only by his own labour, and also in the period of capitalism, when social wealth becomes to an ever-increasing degree the property of those who are in a position to appropriate continually and ever afresh the unpaid labour of others. 69.) This same Parry, however, complains that the English labourer is now (1815) in a much worse condition than in Eden's time (1797). Another case more horrible had come to hisknowledge while on a[Parliamentary] Committee ... But in the colonies! Wake- field tells an extremely doleful anecdote. An English manager of a cotton factory in Oldenburg, declares that the working-time there lasted from 5.30 a. 19. London, 1832. If the value of labour-power be 3 shillings, and the necessary labour-time amount to 6 hours, if the surplus-value likewise be 3 shillings, and the surplus-labour 6 hours, then if the pro- ductiveness of labour were doubled without altering the ratio of necessary labour to surplus-labour, there would be no change of magnitude in surplus-value and price of labour-power. The conversion of this mere possibility into a reality is the result of a long series of relations, that, from our present standpoint of simple circulation, have as yet no existence. . vii.) "The want of regularity in coming to work, encouraged by the possibility and practice of making up for this by working longer hours "(1. Th. Hodgskin, "Popul. The hand-loom weavers, as a matter of fact, continued to require the same time as before; but for all that, the product of one hour of their labour represented after the change only half an hour's social labour, and consequently fell to one-half its former value. Quantity Exported, 1851. If we compare the different cases in I. Suppose its use-value in the labour-process to last only six days, 204 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION Then, on the average, it loses each day one-sixth of its use- value, and therefore parts with one-sixth of its value to the daily product. But he falls into the following errors: (1) he looks upon the special conditions under which these laws hold good as the general and sole conditions of capitalist produc- tion. This is the horse-power meant in the text In ordinary language, and also here and there in quotations in this work, a distinction is drawn between the "nominal" and the "commercial" or "indicated" horse-power of the same engine The old or nominal horse power is calculated exclusively from the length of piston-stroke, and the diameter of the cylinder, and MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 339 self-acting mule spindles, with preparation, or 200 throstle spin- dles, or 15 looms for 40 inch cloth with the appliances for warping, sizing, &c." In the first case.it is the day's produce of 450 mule spindles, in the second, of 200 throstle spindles, in the third, of 15 power-looms, over which the daily cost of one horse-power, and the wear and tear of the machinery set in motion by that power, are spread; so that only a very minute value is transferred by such wear and tear to a pound of yarn or a yard of cloth. On the oth- er hand, the labourer, on quitting the process, is what he was on entering it, a source of wealth, but devoid of all means of making that wealth his own. 5. m.), and he has to work hard all the time to get lid. He makes what regulations he pleases; he alters and makes additions to his code at pleasure; and if he insert the veriest nonsense, the courts say to the workman: Since you have entered into this contract voluntarily, you must now carry it out... That money, however, is in some one else's pocket. I., p. than with the girls in the fac- MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 499 tories." (n. Sickness and dyspepsia are pro- duced by the frequent breaking of the weft, when the weaver sucks the weft through the eye of the shuttle." On the other hand, the substitutes for flour were a Fortunatus' purse to the manu- facturers, by increasing the weight of the yarn. . Hence, aft- er its introduction, the society possesses as much, if not more, of the necessaries of life than before, for the labourers thrown out of work; and that quite apart from the enormous share of the annual produce wasted by the non-workers. . Our analysis has shown, that the form or expression of the value of a commodity originates in the nature of value, and not that value and its magnitude originate in the mode of their ex- pression as exchange-value. * We must, therefore, in considering time-wages, again distinguish between the sum total of the daily or weekly wages, &c, and the price of labour. MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 415 made between the years 1848 and 1852. 6-9, passim. Table B INCREASE OR DECREASE IN THE AREA UNDER CROPS AND GRASS IN ACREAGE Cereal Green Crops Grass and Flax Total Culti- Year Crops Clover vated Land De- De- In- De- In- De- In- De- In- crease crease crease crease crease crease crease crease crease Acres Acres Acres Acres Acres Acres Acres Acres Acres 1861 15,701 36,974 47,969 19,271 81,873 1862 72,734 74,785 6,623 2,055 138,841 1863 144,719 19,358 7,724 63,922 92,431 1864 122,437 2,317 47,486 87,761 10,493 1865 72,450 25,241 68,970 50,159 28,218 1861- 428,041 107,984 82,834 122,850 330,860 65 In the year 1865, 127,470 additional acres came under the heading "grass land," chiefly because the area under the head- ing of "bog and waste unoccupied," decreased by 101,543 acres. . It is, however, nei- ther the one nor the other, but is both together. c, p. The appearance of products as commodities pre-supposes such a development of the social division of labour, that the separation of use-value from exchange-value, a separation which first begins with barter, must already have been completed. This circumstance misled Adam Smith, who treated the working-day as a constant quanti- ty, * to the assertion that the value of labour is constant, although the value of the means of subsistence may vary, and the same working-day, therefore, may represent itself in more or less money for the labourer. We saw in a former chapter, that a certain minimum amount of capital was necessary, in order that the number of labourers simultaneously employed, and, consequently, the amount of surplus-value produced, might suffice to liberate the employer himself from manual labour, to convert him from a small master into a capitalist, and thus formally to establish capitalist produc- tion. His walls are of mud and stones, his floor the bare earth which was there before the hut was built, his roof a mass of loose and sodden thatch. The same thing is going on to-day between England and the United States. One, the expenses of developing that power, which expenses vary with the mode of production; the other, its natural diversity, the difference between the labour-power of men and women, of children and adults. The home, too, will be where shelter can be cheap- est bought; in quarters where commonly there is least fruit of sanitary supervision, least drainage, least scavenging, least sup- pression of public nuisances, least or worst water supply, and, if in town, least light and air. But each of these two changes of form is accomplished by an exchange between commodity and money, by their recip- rocal displacement. Morgan, Lond., 1803, v. . The absence of real criticism and even of honesty, in that catalogue culminates in the sections devoted to the history of the theory of money; the reason is that MacCulloch in this part of the work is flattering Lord Over- stone whom he calls "facile princeps argentariorum." 1 For instance, in subsidies, money loans for carrying on wars or for enabling banks to resume cash payments, &c, it is the money-form, and no other, of value that may be wanted. . Two conditions must nevertheless be fulfilled. On the other hand, a general fall in prices can result only, either from a fall in the values of commodities— the value of money remaining constant— or from a rise in the value of money, the values of commodities re- maining constant. 78.) "Misery up to the extreme point of famine and pestilence, instead of checking, tends to increase popu- lation." (S. 4 Le Trosne, therefore, answers his friend Condillac with justice as follows: "Dans une ... Unable to account for the origin of the puzzling forms assumed by social relations between man and man, people sought to denude them of their strange appearance by ascribing to them a conventional origin. 2 I.e., pp. In the Factory Report of 1844- 1845, it is said with irony: "No instances have come to my knowledge of adult women having expressed any regret at their rights being thus far interfered with." 2 The working-time of children under 13 was reduced to 6y, and in certain circum- stances to 7 hours a-day. "If you allow me," said a highly respectable master to me, "to work only ten minutes in the day over-time, you put one thousand a year in my pocket." 1 "Moments are the elements of profit." 2 Nothing is from this point of view more characteristic than the designation of the workers who work full time as "full-timers," and the children under 13 who are only allowed to work 6 hours as "half-timers." The worker is here nothing more than personi- fied labour-time. of Fact, for 31st. so faithfully exhibited in the Reports of our Assistant Commissioners, and which cannot be regarded without the deepest pain, and a profound sense of national degradation. xlv.) And this in the year of progress 1865! Without considering the expenditure of strength in lifting and carrying, such a child, in the sheds where bottle and flint glass are made, 264 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION SECTION 5.— THE STRUGGLE FOR A NORMAL WORKING-DAY. The knowledge, the judgment, and the will, which, though in ever so small a degree, are practised by the independent peasant or handicraftsman, in the same way as the savage makes the whole art of war consist in the exercise of his personal cunning— these faculties are now required only for the workshop as a whole. A girl going past the house wakes me at half past five in the morning. c, p. 59. The greatest evil of the system that employs young girls on this sort of work, consists in this, that, as a rule, it chains them fast from childhood for the whole of their after-life to the most abandoned rabble. . 62. size; and of another cloth weighing 5-^- lbs., of which 2 lbs. Since the value of the means of production is twelve shillings, 14-p-of these articles mere- ly replace the constant capital advanced. 1 Credit-money springs directly out of the function of money as a means of payment. 2 In those industries, such as potteries, where machinery plays little or no part, the 1 There are, of course, always differences in the intensities of the labour in various industries But these differences are, as Adam Smith has shown, compensated to a partial extent by minor circumstances, peculiar to each sort of labour. 67, 68, 112 The main question: "How is the price of labour determined?" West, however, dismisses with mere banalities. This accidental repartition gets repeated, develops advantages of its own, and gradually ossifies into a systematic division of labour. 1 The determination of the magnitude of value by labour-time is therefore a secret, hidden under the apparent fluctuations in the relative values of commodities. 30. RE-ACTION OF THE ENGLISH FACTORY ACTS ON OTHER COUNTRIES The reader will bear in mind that the production of surplus- value, or the extraction of surplus-labour, is the specific end and aim, the sum and substance, of capitalist production, quite apart from any changes in the mode of production, which may arise from the subordination of labour to capital. The fact that on this occasion the funds are derived from the unpaid labour of his workers makes absolute- ly no difference. Bankes and of the Earl of Shaftesbury. But since cap- ital is by nature a leveller, since it exacts in every sphere of production equality in the conditions of the exploitation of labour, the limitation by law of children's labour, in one branch of in- dustry, becomes the cause of its limitation in others. Parliament decreed that after March 1st, 1834, no child under 11, after March 1st, 1835, no child. This power tells throughout the whole class. 2 In our reflecting and reasoning age a man is not worth much who cannot give a good reason for everything, no matter hpw bad or how crazy. Karl Marx und Friedrich Engels, "Manifest der Kommunistischen Partei," London, 1848, pp. c, p. 2 In certain cases, the increase in the number of hands employed is only apparent; that is, it is not due to the extension of the factories already established, but to the gradual annexation of connected trades; for instance, the increase in power-looms, and in the hands employed by them between 1838 and 1856, was, in the cotton trade, simply owing to the extension of this branch of industry; but in the other trades to the application of steam- power to the carpet-loom, to the ribbon-loom, and to the linen- 1 "Reports of Insp. 717.) "Are they very anx- ious to see the law enforced?" "The majority are." (n. ... Wade, "History of the Middle and Working Classes," pp. 2 Up to this point, however, we are acquainted only with one function of money, namely, to serva as the form of manifestation of the value of commodities, or as the material in which the magnitudes of their values are socially expressed. c, p. Verfassung," Munchen, 1854, p. Moreover, it is obvious that the fact of the collective working group being composed of individ- uals of both sexes and all ages, must necessarily, under suitable conditions, become a source of humane development; although in its spontaneously developed, brutal, capitalistic form, where the labourer exists for the process of production, and not the process of production for the labourer, that fact is a pestiferous source of corruption and slavery. Categories 4,5, 6, of over 15 and not over 100 acres, are, as was known long since in England, too small for capitalistic cultivation of corn, and for sheep-breeding are almost vanishing quantities. m. 3 It was, indeed, very much improved by Watt's first so-called single acting engine; but, in this form, it continued to be a mere machine for rais- ing water, and the liquor from salt mines. Gold and silver coin, on the other hand, are mostly relegated to the sphere of retail trade. As mining did not turn out remunerative enough, I left it for the town, where in succession I became typographer, slater, plumber. .... 1 1 John Bellers, a very phenomenon in the history of Political Economy, saw most clearly at the end of the 17th century, the necessity for abolishing the present system of education and division of labour, which beget hypertrophy and atrophy at the two opposite extremities of society. Public opinion .... The prolongation of the working-day beyond the point at which the labourer would have produced just an equivalent for the value of his labour-power, and the appropriation of that sur- plus-labour by capital, this is production of absolute surplus-value. 24, 25, and 577.) The opinion that this difference is due to the difference in the price-relations between food and clothing then and now is refuted by the most cursory glance at "Chronicon Preciosum, &c." By Bishop Fleetwood. 402 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION language, made up their book, they return to the print work, where they continue until the six months have expired, when another instalment of school attendance becomes due, and they again seek the school until the book is again made up. above all in training human beings to renounce their desultory habits of work, and to identify themselves with the unvarying regularity of the complex automaton. So far from this being the case, the surplus-value, like the original capital, divides itself into constant capital and variable capital, into means of production and labour-power. On the other hand, the old capi- tal periodically reproduced with change of composition, repels more and more of the labourers formerly employed by it. The Employment of Women and Children In so far as machinery dispenses with muscular power, it becomes a means of employing labourers of slight muscular strength, and those whose bodily development is incomplete, but whose limbs are all the more supple. tal y wage deduc- 1 Rent. vol.,— Meitzen, "Der Boden des preussischen Staats."— Hanssen, "Leibeigen- schaft in Schleswig-Holstein."— F. Dr. Simon, the chief medical officer of the Privy Council and the official editor of the "Public Health Reports," says: "In my fourth Report (1863) I s lowed, how it is practically impossible for the workpeople to insist upon that which is their first sanitary right, viz., the right that, no matter what the work for which their employer brings them together, the labour, so far as it depends upon him, should be freed from all avoidably unwholesome conditions. What the bourgeoisie, therefore, produces, above all, are its own grave-diggers. And in addi- tion a willing help at the festive board? 1756, pp 185 and 202. spects analogous, the necessary labour-time is different. destroyed 36 villages to create the New Forest.... Child, etc., to Adam Smith aod Eden. 3 1. The circulation of capital has therefore no lim- its. Pitt, in the month of November 1795," Edit. To the utter indignation of all present, they were each mulcted in a fine of 6d. The normal price of labour is in the first case calculated on the labourer working 15 hours, in the second case on his working 6 hours a day on the average. By thus acting on the external world and changing it, he at the same time changes his own nature. D., "The Ques- tion of the Necessity of the Existing Corn Laws Considered." London, 1816, p. c , pp 19-23 passim.) 2 "Each handicraftsman being .. 166, seq. Now and then, however, as in his criticism of the ear- lier systems of Political Economy, he takes the right view. is infinitely better adapted to women than to men. Although they formed one-third of the total number of manufacturers, yet their mills absorbed a much smaller part of the capital invested in the cotton trade. But whatever may have been its particular starting-point, its final form is invariably the same — a productive mechanism whose parts are human beings. By the currency of the circulating medium, the connexion between buyers and sellers, is not merely expressed. Only it betrays its thoughts in that language with which alone it is familiar, the language of commodities. It has use-value for others; but for himself its only direct use-value is that of being a depository of exchange-value, and, consequently, a means of exchange. Diamonds are of very rare occurrence on the earth's surface, and hence their discovery costs, on an average, a great deal of labour-time. . For the end ol the 18th century cl. 66- 69.) "The difference between real value and exchange-value is based upon this fact, namely, that the value of a thing is different from the so-called equivalent given for it in trade, i.e., that this equivalent is no equivalent." (F. The pivot of these crises is to be found in moneyed capi- tal, and their sphere of direct action is therefore the sphere of that capital, viz., banking, the stock exchange, and finance. Wheat, cwts 16,202,312 41,033,503 Barley, 3,669,653 6,624,800 Oats 3,174,801 4,426,994 Rye, 388,749 7,108 Flour, . 1 12 persons George Street, No. 150 . The necessity for giving an external expression to this EXCHANGE §7 contrast for the purposes of commercial intercourse, urges on the establishment of an independent form of value, and finds no rest until it is once for all satisfied by the differentiation of com- modities into commodities and money. 318.) 8 In corals, each individual is, in fact, the stomach of the whole group; but it supplies the group with nourishment, instead of, like the Roman patrician, withdrawing it. wages may very materially differ in amount... 4 "Capital is said by a Quarterly Reviewer to fly turbulence and strife, and to be timid, which is very true; but this is very incompletely stating the question. In other cases, these so-called school-rooms are like small store-rooms without fire-places. . On this rapidity depends what proportion of the sum of the prices can, on the average, be realised by each single coin. It avails him nothing, if he is so cunning as to import from Europe, with his own capital, his own wage- workers. of Fact., April 30th, 1849, p. Their goods were still paid for with their own money. The private property of the labourer in his means of production is the foundation of petty industry, whether agricultural, manufacturing, or both; petty industry, again, is an essential condition for the development of social production and of the free individuality of the labourer himself. the working stock of the cattle and the ... the owners of the works. According to the statement of Dr. Meyer in the Bavarian Gazette, May 9th, 1862, the result of an average of 9 years is, that in Prussia out of 1,000 conscripts 716 were unfit for military service, 317 because of deficiency in height, and 399 because of bodily defects.... The succes- sors of these rich are occupying the larger houses at the rate of a family to each room [. Reference to two circumstances is sufficient here. 483. L The commodity that figures as universal equivalent, is, on the other hand, excluded from the relative value-form. This period terminated about the end of November, 1871. With reference to the children in these colonies, Dr. Hun- ter says: "People are not now alive to tell us how children were brought up before this age of dense agglomerations of poor began, and he would be a rash prophet who should tell us what future behaviour is to be expected from the present growth of children, who, under circumstances probably never before paralleled in this country, are now completing- their education for future practice, as 'dangerous classes' by sitting up half the night with per- sons of every age, half naked, drunken, obscene, and quarrelsome." (1. * 1 In order to prove that labour alone is that all-sufficient and real measure, by which at all times the value of all commodities can be esti- mated and compared, Adam Smith says, "Equal quantities of labour must at all times and in all places have the same value for the labourer. 479. But for all that, the use of water, as the predominant motive power, was beset with difficulties. Age 45-55. When, in 1790, the first census of slaves was taken in the United States, their number was 697,000; in 1861 it had nearly reached four millions. Moreover, the debts contracted each day, and the payments falling due on the same day, are quite incommensurable quantities. The direction taken by this change is determined by the dif- ficulties experienced in consequence of the unchanged form of the implement. If he can sell his goods at a higher price, while his workmen's wages remain unaltered, he is clearly benefited.... 10 y d. The English agricultural labourer receives only */4 as much milk, and J4 as much bread as the Irish. They become capital, only under circumstances in which they serve at the same time as means of exploitation and subjection of the labourer. Com., V. 285.) DIVISION OF LABOUR AND MANUFACTURE 359 chant could buy every kind of commodity, but labour as a commod- ity he could not buy. Gf. Reports, &c, ending 31st October, 1863, p. Hence the air inhaled in 24 hours by each individual is about 720,000 cubic inches, or 416 cubic feet. They introduced more machinery, and in a moment the labourers were redundant again in a propor- tion satisfactory even to the farmers. THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALISTIC ACCUMULATION The relative surplus-population exists in every possible form. The majority of the men themselves cannot." (ns. 205, 9th Ed., p. The price of the yarn is fifteen shillings, and fifteen shil- lings were spent in the open market upon the constituent elements 1 These figures are quite arbitrary. This is 1 Jerome had to wrestle hard, not only in his youth with the hodily flesh, as is shown by his fight in the desert with the handsome women of his imagination, but also in his old age with the spiritual flesh. But this exchange-ratio may express either the real magnitude of that commodity's value, or the quantity of gold deviating from that value, for which, according to circumstances, it may be parted with. iv. noob<i ctvTa|i6et(S ea&ou 7idvTa, cprpiv o'Hpax/.eitoi;, xai nop dnavrwv, uio7iep ipuaoo ip-i]\ia-:a xal xp^jJtitcov ypoao?'. Formerly, I employed four boys to every mechanic. This work also remarks: "Simple and outwardly unimportant as this appendage to lathes may appear, it is not, we believe, averring too much to state, that its influ- ence in improving and extending the use of machinery has been as great as that produced by Watt's improvements of the steam-engine itself. Light assists in the elaboration of good plastic blood, and hardens the fibre alter it has been laid down. On the other hand, however, our notion of productive labour becomes narrowed. But in the great towns, where each can find many buyers, one trade is sufficient to maintain the man who carries it on. At the same time, spinning and weaving are carried on in each family as subsidiary industries. The particular Equivalent form Each commodity, such as, coat, tea, corn, iron, &c, figures in the expression of value of the linen, as an equivalent, and, con- sequently, as a thing that is value. THE LABOUR-PROCESS 187 assume, bought it at its full value, say of ten shillings. Inversely, the former division reacts upon and develops and multiplies the latter. Assuredly no one was more thoroughly initiated in the mys- teries of this happiness than the late M. But the value of labour in relation to other commodities ... To this, was. In 1858 the official value of cotton goods exported, was £182,221,681; but the real or marketable value was only £43,001,322, being a ten-fold quantity sold for little more than double the former price. We saw in Chapt. M. In its qualitative aspect, or formally considered, money has no bounds to its efficacy, i.e., it is the universal representative of material wealth, because it is directly convertible into any other commodity. c, p. when these cases are brought forward. As a rule, the exploiter of a mine, whether its owner or his tenant, builds a number of cottages for his hands. 2. The farmers do not always till sufficiently the corn and turnip lands, and the landlord has found it best to throw all his farms together into 2 or 3. He might also have said that the Ameri- can peasant proprietor is but a serf who does enforced labour for himself instead of for his lord. But this constant tendency to equilibrium, of the various spheres of production, is exercised, only in the shape of a reaction against the constant upsetting of this equilibrium. 168, 169.) The "difficulte"— it exists for him, mt for Ricardo— that Say means to clear up is this: Why does not the exchange-value of the use-values increase, when their quantity increases in consequence of in- creased productive power of labour? Nevertheless, in spite of the mass of hands actually dis- placed and virtually replaced by machinery, we can understand how the factory operatives, through the building of more mills and the extension of old ones in a given industry, may become more numerous than the manufacturing workmen and handicrafts- men that have been displaced. the ventilation is so bad in general that the men can scarcely breathe; they are quite unfit for employment of any kind MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 501 after they have been for a length of time in connexion with their work; indeed, just at the part of the mine where I am working, men have been obliged to leave their employment and come home in consequence of that . I note before- hand that incomes from this source pay income tax on every- thing over £60. Nail-mak- THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 631 the magnitude of social capital already functioning, and the de- gree of its increase, with the extension of the scale of production, and the mass of the labourers set in motion, with the development of the productiveness of their labour, with the greater breadth and fulness of all sources of wealth, there is also an extension of the scale on which greater attraction of labourers by capital is accompanied by their greater repulsion; the rapidity of the change in the organic composition of capital, and in its technical form increases, and an increasing number of spheres of production be- comes involved in this change, now simultaneously, now alter- nately. 2. By the co-operation of numerous wage-labourers, the sway of capital develops into a requisite for carrying on the labour-proc- ess itself, into a real requisite of production. 486). MANUFACTURER AND BOYARD Capital has not invented surplus-labour. Every useful thing, as iron, paper, &c, may be looked at from the two points of view of quality and quantity. Industrial, &c, Profits Total Schedules A. To be perfectly happy, Ireland must get rid of at least one-third of a million of labouring men. The wage-labourers of agriculture consisted partly of peasants, who utilised their leisure time by working on the large estates, partly of an independent special class of wage-labourers, relatively and absolutely few in numbers. In the stormy youth of Modern Industry, especially from 1797 to 1815, it served as a lever for the lengthening of the working-day, and the lowering of wages. But, on the other hand, these new freedmen became sellers of themselves only after they had been robbed of all their own means of production, and of all the guarantees of existence afforded by the old feudal arrangements. The capital-value was originally advanced in the money-form. For his maintenance he requires a given quantity of the means of sub- sistence. Or the sedileship of the town may have pulled itself together for the removal of the most shocking abuses. p 48. PRODUCTIVENESS AND INTENSITY OF LABOUR CONSTANT. But here, to make amends to capital bereft of its "freedom," the work-time for children from 11 to 13 was raised from 10 to 10— hours. 546 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION clear that he cannot obtain for himself the value of the product of 6 hours if he is employed less than 12 hours. Then it seems money is not his want, but a price for his corn and cattel, which he would sell, but cannot... In the form of society we are about to consider, they are, in addition, the material depositories of ex- change-value. Useful labour cannot consume these means of production without transferring their value to the new prod- uct, but, to be salable, labour-power must be capable of supplying useful labour in the branch of industry in which it is to be em- ployed. Some of the manufacturers, even, who had man- aged their factories in conformity with the Act of 1833, overwhelmed Parliament with memorials on the immoral com- petition of their false brethren whom greater impudence, or more fortunate local circumstances, enabled to break the law. The German "Wert- sein," to be worth, for instance, expresses in a less striking man- ner than the Romance verbs "valere," "valer," "valoir," that the equating of commodity B to commodity A, is commodity A's own mode of expressing its value. THE RATE OF SURPLUS-VALUE 223 To split up in this manner the product into different parts, of which one represents only the labour previously spent on the means of production, or the constant capital, another, only the necessary labour spent during the process of production, or the variable capital, and another and last part, only the surplus- labour expended during the same process, or the surplus-value; to do this, is, as will be seen later on from its application to complicated and hitherto unsolved problems, no less important than it is simple. "Order must in one way or another be established," exclaims in 1770 the oft-cited author of the "Essay on Trade and Commerce." "Order," re-echoes Dr. Andrew Ure 66 years later, "Order" was wanting in manufac- ture based on "the scholastic dogma of division of labour," and "Arkwright created order." At the same time manufacture was unable, either to seize upon the production of society to its full, extent, or to revolution- ise that production to its very core. another great cause to which the bad constitutions of the potters are to he attributed." ("Child Empl. In the inverted form, M— G— M, on the contrary, the buyer lays out money in order that, as a seller, he may recover money. On account of the garden? It therefore makes its appearance at an early date in history, though not in the same predominating and characteristic manner as now-a-days. Married women, who work in gangs along with boys and girls, are, for a stipulated sum of money, placed at the disposal of the farmer, by a man called the "undertaker," who contracts for the whole gang. The sole alteration con- sists in the subdivision and denomination. In one place the knight reasons as follows: "Knight: You, my neighbour, the husbandman, you Maister Mercer, and you Goodman Cooper, with other artificers, may save yourselves metely well. The cotton too must not be such rubbish as to cause extra waste in being worked, but must be of suitable quality. A single commodity, the linen, appears therefore to have acquired the character of direct exchangeability with every other commodity because, and in so far as, this charac- ter is denied to every other commodity. see what evils will attend the lim- iting to 10 hours the working of the factory. . But accumulation, the gradual increase of capital by repro- duction as it passes from the circular to the spiral form, is clearly a very slow procedure compared with centralisation, which has 1 [Note in the 4th German edition. 349. The more empty the district is of men, the greater is its "relative surplus-population," the greater is their pressure on the means of employment, the greater is the absolute excess of the agri- cultural population over the means for housing it, the greater, therefore, in the villages is the local surplus-population and the most pestilential packing together of human beings. The process then differentiates them into commodi- ties and money, and thus produces an external opposition corre- sponding to the internal opposition inherent in them, as being at once use-values and values. "It is not at all uncommon in Nottingham to find 14 to 20 children huddled together in a small room, of, perhaps, not more than 12 feet square, and employed for 15 hours out of the 24, at work that of itself is exhausting, from its weariness and monoto- ny, and is besides carried on under every possible unwholesome condition. Horner in "Reports of Insp. Here, the commodities that take part in the process, do not count any longer as necessary adjuncts of labour-power in the production of a definite, useful object. * One example will suffice. First, by the physical bounds of labour-power. In these instances there is no con- sumption of value." (S. 23. . The ordinance of 1350 in France, issued in the name of King John, corresponds with it. Money ends the movement only to begin it again. and at the same period of the day. The labourer receives l-^d. of cotton. This kind of parish-slaves was kept up in England until far into the 19th century under the name of "roundsmen." Elizabeth, 1572: Unlicensed beggars above 14 years of age are to be severely flogged and branded on the left ear unless some one will take them into service for two years; in case of a repetition of the offence, if they are over 18, they are to be exec- uted, unless some one will take them into service for two years; 1 The author of the "Essay on Trade, etc.," 1770, says, "In the reign of Edward VI. It is true, these regulations con- tained in the statute mentioned by Petty, apply also to ap- prentices. f pp 29, 30, 25.) 130 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION SECTION 3.— MONEY The commodity that functions as a measure of value, and, either in its own person or by a representative, as the medium of circulation, is money. 526 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION III. 2 1. So far as they are values, the coat and the linen are things of a like substance, objec- tive expressions of essentially identical labour. This revolution hangs together with radical changes in agriculture which we need not here further inquire into. . The men stealers were trained for this purpose. But the act of equating it to the weaving, reduces the tailoring to that which is really equal in the two kinds of labour, to their common character of human labour. In dry words, the Reglement itself de- clares with true Russian irony that by 12 working-days one must understand the product of the manual labour of 36 days, by 1 day of field labour 3 days, and by 1 day of wood carrying in like manner three times as much. 29th Sept., 1849. A part of the price of the com- modity consists of the price of labour. 6, 7. Plainly, by the quantity of the value-creating substance, the labour, contained in the article. 56.) A medical man states: "No special hours are allowed for cooling, but if the temperature gets too high, or the workers' hands get soiled from perspiration, they are allowed to go out for a few minutes.... If the general extension of factory legislation to all trades for the purpose of protecting the working-class both in mind and body has become inevitable, on the other hand, as we have al- ready pointed out, that extension hastens on the general conver- sion of numerous isolated small industries into a few combined industries carried on upon a large scale; it therefore accelerates the concentration of capital and the exclusive predominance of the factory system. With it has spread the form of lockjaw, which a Vienna physician in 1845 discovered to be a disease peculiar to lucifer-matchmakers. the whole of the annual savings, added to the fixed capital, would have no effect in increasing the demand for labour." (John Barton, "Observations on the Circumstances which Influence the Condition of the Labouring Classes of Society." London, 1817, pp. 1st, The journeymen are miserable in winter for want of work, the mercers and master- weavers not daring to lay out their stocks to keep the journeymen employed before the spring comes, and they know what the fashion will then be: 2ndly, In the spring the journeymen are not sufficient, but the master-weavers must draw in many prentices, that they may supply the trade of the kingdom in a quarter or half a year, which robs the plough of hands, drains the country of labourers, and in a great part stocks the city with beggars, and starves some in winter that are ashamed to beg." ("Essays about the Poor, Manufac- tures, &c," p. It is otherwise during the historic genesis of capitalist production. These do not enter directly into the process, but without them it is either impossible for it to take place at all, or possible only to a par- tial extent. 487, p. "Where land is very cheap and all men are free, where every one who so pleases can easily obtain a piece of land for himself, not only is labour very dear, as re- spects the labourer's share of the produce, but the difficulty is to obtain combined labour at any price." 4 As in the colonies the separation of the labourer from the conditions of labour and their root, the soil, does not yet exist, or only sporadically, or on too limited a scale, so neither does the separation of agriculture from industry exist, nor the de- struction of the household industry of the peasantry. 72.) 442 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION except by capital, is to him an impossibility. The great sensation this pamphlet caused, was due solely to party interest. Its existence as a material thing is put out of sight. Thus, for instance, the various original types of Roman and Teutonic private property are deducible from differ- ent forms of Indian common property." (Karl Marx, "Zur Kritik, &c," P- 10.) COMMODITIES 79 by his labour-time. What, first of all, practically concerns producers when they make an exchange, is the question, how much of some other product they get for their own? The characters that stamp products as commodities, and whose establishment is a necessary pre- liminary to the circulation of commodities, have already acquired the stability of natural, self-understood forms of social life, before man seeks to decipher, not their historical character, for in his eyes they are immutable, but their meaning. . 1 * This sentence has been added to the English text in conformity with the 4th German edition. It falls to 3d. "Landlords and farmers," says Dr. Hunter, "work here hand in hand. Suppose, also, that he discharges 50 of his workmen, and employs the remaining 50 with machinery that costs him £1,500. Age 3 5-4 5. If, on the other hand, the price of labour-power differs from its value, in like manner the price of labour differs from its so-called value. Nevertheless, the value that he transfers from the cotton to the yarn is either one-sixth of what it was before the variation, or, as the case may be, six times as much as before, The same 202 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION result occurs when the value of the instruments of labour rises or falls, while their useful efficacy in the process remains unal- tered. This means close attention. of Fact., 31st Oct., 1855.") These manufacturers are clever folk, and not without reason were they enthusiastic for the slave-holders' rebellion. THE WORKING-DAY 295 male operatives. Clearly 1 Among the ancient Germans the unit for measuring land was what could be harvested in a day, and was called Tagwerk, Tagwanne (jurnale, or terra jurnalis, or diornalis), Mannsmaad, &c (See G. In tanning, e.g., he deals with the skins as his simple ob- ject of labour. Thus the original conversion of money into capital is achieved in the most exact accordance with the economic laws of commod- ity production and with the right of property derived from them. Mr. Robert Gardner reduced the hours of labour in his two large fac- tories at Preston, on and after the 20th April, 1844, from twelve to eleven hours a day. MACHINE RY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 437 he says: "A creation destined to restore order among the indus- trious classes. Compare "Reports. . They were now transformed into material elements of variable capital. Just as when we estimate the value of any commodity by a definite quantity of the use-value of some other commodity, so in estimating the value of the former in gold, we assume noth- ing more than that the production of a given quantity of gold costs, at the given period, a given amount of labour. Hie Rhodus, hie salta! 1 From the foregoing investigation, the reader will see that this state- ment only means that the formation of capital must be possible even though the price and value of a commodity be the same; for its formation cannot be attributed to any deviation of the one from the other. The boy is a mere substitute for steam power." ("Ch. Empl Comm. c. . Justices of the peace in petty sessions are authorised to have them publicly whipped and for the first offence to imprison them for 6 months, for the second for 2 years. The difference is s or a surplus-value of £90. But the number of operatives was, in 1856, 56,131; in 1862, 52,429. 101.) The same report then gives some examples of the morality and virtue of these same pure-minded manufacturers, of the tricks, the artifices, the cajoling, the threats, and the falsifications, they made use of, in order, first, to compel a few defenceless workmen to sign petitions of such a kind, and then to impose them upon Parliament as the petitions of a whole branch of industry, or a whole country. The following are the statis- tics of 12 houses in Langtoft, with 12 bedrooms, 38 adults, and 36 children. "L'esprit des lois, c'est la propriete," sayslJnguet. A larger part of their own surplus- product, always increasing and continually transformed into additional capital, comes back to them in the shape of means of payment, so that they can extend the circle of their enjoyments; can make some additions to their consumption-fund of clothes, furniture, &c, and can lay by small reserve-funds of money. While in each individual workshop it enforces uni- formity, regularity, order, and economy, it increases by the im- mense spur which the limitation and regulation of the working- day give to technical improvement, the anarchy and the catas- trophes of capitalist production as a whole, the intensity of labour, and the competition of machinery with the labourer. It represents now 3 hours of social labour instead of the 6 formerly necessary. c, vol. 126). xx., § 82, and xxiii., n. 140 working-days remain. The transition is very diffi- cult in those cases where the production of the article by manufac- ture consists, not of a series of graduated processes, but of a great number of disconnected ones. 1.851. But of the advantage of the union I have no doubt. . this ... Smith, Lemontey, and Say, as regards their criticisms of Division of Labour, and have shown, for the first time, that Division of Labour as practised in manufactures, is a specific form of the capitalist mode of production. come se colla mano dell'uomo il glutine di un insetto si trasmuti in velluto ovvero alcuni pezzetti di metallo si organizzino a formare una ripetizione."— Pietro Veri, "Meditazioni sulla Economia Politica" [first printed in 1773] inCus- todi's edition of the Italian Economists, Parte Moderna, t. During the manufacturing period, handicraft labour, al- tered though it was by division of labour, was yet the basis. Petty, has investigated the real rela- tions of production in bourgeois society, in contradistinction to vulgar econ- omy, which deals with appearances only, ruminates without ceasing on the materials long since provided by scientific economy, and there seeks plausible explanations of the most obtrusive phenomena, for bourgeois daily use, but for the rest, confines itself to systematising in a pedantic way, and proclaiming for everlasting truths, the trite ideas held by the self-complacent bourgeoisie with regard to their own world, to them the best of all possible worlds. This law," adds Liebig, "was first enunciated by John Stuart Mill in his 'Principles of Pol. and thus his profit will be raised. I give, in conclusion, a comparative table of Mr. Redgrave's, on the average number of spindles per factory and per spinner in the different countries of Europe. . 2 26 persons Cella rs Regent Square ...... Some idea of the ground laid waste for purely sporting purposes in Scotland may be formed from the fact that it embraced an area larger than the whole county of Perth. of Fact, for 31st Oct., 1855," pp. Bailey, 1. During the second period of the labour-process, that in which his labour is no longer necessary labour, the workman, it is true, labours, expends labour-power; but his labour, being no longer necessary labour, he creates no value for himself. I, p. According to Adam Smith, 10 men, in his day, made in 1 In an appeal, dated 1863, of the factory operatives of Lancashire, &c, for the purpose of forming a society for organised emigration, we find the following: "That a large emigration of factory workers is now absolutely essential to raise them from their present prostrate condition, few will deny; but to show that a continuous stream of emigration is at all times demanded, and, without which it is impossible for them to maintain their position in ordinary times, we beg to call attention to the subjoined facts: — In 1814 the official value of cotton goods exported was £17,665,378, whilst the real marketable value was £20,070,824. Nevertheless, the baking trade is always over- whelmed with applicants. c, p. 2 1. As soon as man, instead of working with an implement on the subject of his labour, becomes merely the motive power of an implement-machine, it is a mere accident that motive power takes the disguise of human muscle; and it may equally well take the form of wind, water or steam. and 10 p. On the other hand, gold serves as an ideal measure of value, only because it has already, in the process of exchange, established itself as the money-commodity. Six adults, living with 4 children in one sleep- ing apartment, pay £3 10s. * Since the production and the circulation of commodities are the general pre-requisites of the capitalist mode of production, division of labour in manufacture demands, that division of labour in society at large should previously have attained a certain de- gree of development. . "But ... 94 CHAPTER III MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OF COMMODITIES SECTION 1.— THE MEASURE OF VALUES Throughout this work, I assume, for the sake of simplicity, gold as the money-commodity. 52, 53.) 1 The peculiar circumstance, that while the ounce of gold serves in England as the unit of the standard of money, the pound sterling does not form an aliquot part of it, has been explained as follows: "Our coinage was originally adapted to the employment of silver only, hence, an ounce oi sil- ver can always be divided into a certain adequate number of pieces oi coin; but as gold was introduced at a later period into a coinage adapted only to silver, an ounce of gold cannot be coined into an aliquot number of pieces Maclaren, "A Sketch of the History of the Currency." London, 1856, p. On the other hand, the surplus- value arising from the curtailment of the necessary labour-time, and from the corresponding alteration in the respective lengths of the two components of the working-day, I call relative surplus- value. m. P. says: "It would be unjust to the larger employers that their factories should be placed under regulation, while the hours of labour in the smaller places in their own branch of business were under no legislative restriction. 1,098,261 All who are employed in cotton, woollen, worsted, flax, hemp, silk, and jute fac- tories, in stocking making and lace making by machinery, 642,607* All who are employed in coal mines and metal mines, 565,835 All who are employed in metal works (blast-furnaces, rolling mills, &c), and metal manufactures of every kind, . Ten hours were necessary for the reproduction of the value of the labour-power; now only six are required. Therefore the labour-time requisite for the production of labour-power reduces itself to that necessary for the production of those means of subsistence; in other words, the value of labour- power is the value of the means of subsistence necessary for the maintenance of the labourer. The tenants have to make their own privies, the landlord only supplies a hole. Two millions of acres... To say that the supervention of wage-labour adulterates commodity production is to say that commodity production must not develop if it is to remain unadulterated. Machinery is put to a wrong use, with the object of transforming the workman, from his very childhood, into a part of a detail-machine. As a use-value, the linen is something palpably different from the coat; as value, it is the same as the coat, and now has the ap- pearance of a coat. . We can however follow this total product through all the stages of its production; and in this way we shall arrive at the same result as before, if we represent the partial products, given off at the different stages, as functionally different parts of the final or total product. . The operatives stream in thou- sands into the towns of Lancashire and Yorkshire, are driven back by the military, and their leaders brought to trial at Lancaster; 1843 great misery; 1844 revival; 1845 great prosperity; 1846 con- tinued improvement at first, then reaction. The official statistics for the year 1872 show, as compared with 1871, a decrease in area under culti- vation of 134,915 acres. In England alone, which we take as our example, has it the classic form. when it had been returned to him for revision. But in fact, it is capitalistic accumulation itself that constantly produces, and produces in the direct ratio of its own energy and extent, a rela- tively redundant population of labourers, i.e., a population of greater extent than suffices for the average needs of the self- expansion of capital, and therefore a surplus-population. Hence, instead of 10 hours, the labourer need now work only 7-p- hours, in order to reproduce this value. 13-14). In manufacture the workmen are parts of a living mechanism. So soon, however, as the factory system has gained a certain breadth of footing and a definite degree of maturity, and, especially, so soon as its technical ba- sis, machinery, is itself produced by machinery; so soon as coal mining and iron mining, the metal industries, and the means of transport have been revolutionised; so soon, in short, as the general conditions requisite for production by the modern indus- trial system have been established, this mode of production ac- quires an elasticity, a capacity for sudden extension by leaps and bounds that finds no hindrance except in the supply of raw mate- 1 "The sufferings of the hand-loom weavers were the subject of an in- quiry by a Royal Commission, but although their distress was acknowledged and lamented, the amelioration of their condition was left, and probably necessarily so, to the chances and changes of time, which it may now be hoped" [20 years later!] "have nearly obliterated those miseries, and not improbably by the present great extension of the power-loom." ("Rep. that form its constant part, is COn- tained in i^ths of the product or in 16 lbs. Every introduction of improved methods, therefore, works almost simultaneously on the new capital and on that al- ready in action. 579 CHAPTER XXIV CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO CAPITAL SECTION 1.— CAPITALIST PRODUCTION ON A PROGRESSIVELY INCREASING SCALE. 4 1 On 2 modern power-looms a weaver now makes in a week of 60 hours 26 pieces of certain quality, length, and breadth; while on the old power- looms he could make no more than 4 such pieces. c, p 50.) "As the number of labourers increases, the productive power of society augments in the compound ratio of that increase, multiplied by the effects of the division of labour." (Th. Hodgskin, 1. c, p. . The method of calculating the rate of surplus-value is there- fore, shortly, as follows. 32: "In luo- codi progettar sistemi inutili per la lelicita de'popoli, mi limitero a inves- tigare la ragione della loro infelicita." THE GENERAL LAW OP CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 647 the most servile, the most sordid, and the most ignoble offices in the community. There are also in the borough more youthful prostitutes than I have known for the last 25 years." 3 We find then, in the first 45 years of the English cotton trade, from 1770 to 1815, only 5 years of crisis and stagnation; but this was the period of monopoly. THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 711 NUMBER AND EXTENT OF FARMS IN IRELAND IN 1864 (1) Farms not over 1 acre. The Ten Hours' Act, they cried, leaves no other alternative. Further, if a horse must fully maintain its health, it can work no more than 8 hours a day. In Wiltshire, e.g., the weekly wages rose from 7s. 1866," p. The chevaliers d'industrie, however, only succeeded in supplanting the chevaliers of the sword by making use of events of which they themselves were wholly innocent. Indeed, as regards the indoor operatives, the work which obtains the scanty pit- tance of food, is for the most part excessively prolonged. "Wie menschlich von solch grossem Herrn!" From Table E we saw that, during 1864, of £4,368,610 of total profits, three surplus-value makers pocketed only £262,610; that in 1865, however, out of £4,669,979 total profits, the same three virtuosi of "abstinence" pocketed £274,448; in 1864, 26 surplus-value makers reached to £646,377; in 1865, 28 surplus- value makers reached to £736,448; in 1864, 121 surplus-value mak- ers, £1,066,912; in 1865, 186 surplus-value makers, £1,320,996; in 1864, 1,131 surplus-value makers £2,150,818, nearly half of the total annual proflt;in 1865, 1,194 surplus-value makers, £2,418,933, more than half of the. 248 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION proposal "to stop the machines at least during meal-times." A clause, says Mr. Otley, manager of a wall-paper factory in the Borough, "which allowed work between, say 6 a. The steam-engine has worked wonders in the way of drainage. The labouring people should never think themselves independent of their superiors It is extremely dangerous to encourage mobs in a commercial state like ours, where, perhaps, seven parts out of eight of the whole, are people with little or no property. Bell, Mr. Guthrie, &c, in a word, the most distinguished physicians and surgeons in London, had declared in their evidence before the House of Commons, that there was danger in delay. The same change would have taken place, if A, without the formality of an exchange, had directly stolen the £10 from B. Hence, the character of inde- pendence and estrangement which the capitalist mode of produc- tion as a whole gives to the instruments of labour and to the prod- uct, as against the workman, is developed by means of machinery into a thorough antagonism. Nor is the relation between the coat and the labour that produced it altered by the circumstance that tailoring may have become a special trade, an independent branch of the social division of labour. 52.) "By making them masters of their own time (the Factory Acts) have given them a moral energy which is directing them to the eventual possession of political power" (1. Ferguson who showed the disadvantageous effects of division of labour, Adam Smith was perfectly clear on this point. Neverthe- less Dr. Simon, in his report of 1865, says: "Speaking generally, it may be said that the evils are uncontrolled in England." By order of the Privy Council, in 1864, an inquiry was made into the conditions of the housing of the agricultural labourers, in 1865 of the poorer classes in the towns. Vulgar economy which, indeed, "has really learnt nothing," here as everywhere sticks to appearances in opposition to the law which regulates and explains them. The division of labour, as carried out in Manufacture, not only simplifies and multiplies the qualitatively different parts of the social collective labourer, but also creates a fixed mathemati- cal relation or ratio which regulates the quantitative extent of those parts — i.e., the relative number of labourers, or the relative size of the group of labourers, for each detail operation. This certainty in the result, and this possibility of interrupting the work are, of course, easier to be attained in the purely me- chanical industries than in those in which chemical and physical processes play a part; as, for instance, in the earthenware trade, in bleaching, dyeing, baking, and in most of the metal industries. 2 In order to understand that which follows, we must remember that "Close Villages" are those whose owners are one or two large landlords. But, mark well, that this quid pro quo exists in the case of any commodity B, only when some other commodity A enters into a value-relation with it, and then only within the limits of this relation. Kinnaird: "Some of the boys are keepers of doors?" "Yes." "Is there not gen- erally a very great draught every time you open a door or close it?" "Yes, generally there is." "It sounds a very easy thing, but it is in fact rather a painful one?" "He is imprisoned there just the same as if he was in a cell of a gaol." Bourgeois Vivian: "When- ever a boy is furnished with a lamp cannot he read?" "Yes, he can read, if ho finds himself in candles ... It increases the social productive power of labour, not only for the benefit of the capitalist instead of for that of the labourer, but it does this by crippling the individual labourers. II. For instance, Condillac says: "It is not true that on an exchange of commodities we give value for value. 3 No wonder that in some parts of Lancashire a kind of famine fever broke out. But then this does not generally happen, where there is most fertile land." ("Observations on Certain Verbal Disputes, &c." pp. First, the cotton and spindle must concur in the production of a use-value; they must in the present case become yarn. 137. "(Storch: "Cours d'Econ. 40.) MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 393 further, since the actual wage of the labourer at one time sinks below the value of his labour-power, at another rises above it, it is possible for the difference between the price of the machinery and the price of the labour-power replaced by that machinery to vary very much, although the difference between the quantity of labour requisite to produce the machine and the total quantity replaced by it, remain constant. c, pp. Tools, machines, workshops, and vessels, are of use in the labour-proc- ess, only so long as they retain their original shape, and are ready each morning to renew the process with their shape unchanged. Ortes: "Delia Economia Nazionale libri sei,* 1777," in Custodi, Parte Moderna, t. The sale and the purchase constitute one identical act, an exchange between a commodity- owner and an owner of money, between two persons as opposed to each other as the two poles of a magnet. a. But we must bear in. 3 The Co- 1 In consequence of the great demand for cotton alter 1861, the pro- duction of cotton, in some thickly populated districts of India, was extend- ed at the expense of rice cultivation. Pitt opposed this, but confessed that the "condition of the poor was cruel." Finally, in 1813, the laws for the regulation of wages were repealed. This alternation may be effected in various ways; e.g., it may be so arranged that part of the work- ers are one week employed on day-work, the next week on night- work. This dozen of individuals is maintained at the expense of the whole community. In this relation, the iron officiates as a body representing nothing but weight. When this happens, their place is made up by one or more boys, who work in the other turn. 6 1. 27, n. 8 1. Report," p. Now the parts of engines are produced by labour with less skill, but with good tools. of Fact., for 31st Oct., 1848, p. 18G4, p. Suddenly the voice of the labourer, which had been stifled in the storm and stress of the process of production, rises: The commodity that I have sold to you differs from the crowd of other commodities, in that its use creates value, and a value greater than its own. Every day brings a man 24 hours nearer to his grave: but how many days he has still to travel on that road, no man can tell accurately by merely looking at him. On the other side of the channel, in Scotland, the agricultural labourer, the plough- man, protests against his 13-14 hours' work in the most in- clement climate, with 4 hours' additional work on Sunday (in this land of Sabbatarians!), 1 whilst, at the same time, three railway men are standing before a London coroner's jury— a guard, an engine-driver, a signalman. 9, 14 passim. A distribution of this portion amongst them is consequently necessary. then labour must, of course, be dear. But at the same time it was necessary to produce the geometrically accurate straight lines, planes, circles, cylinders, cones, and spheres, required in the detail parts of the machines. lb. Now we know that the capitalist divides his capital into two parts. 108 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION also frees the social process of production and the relations of the individual producers to each other within that process, from all dependence on the will of those producers, and that the seeming mutual independence of the individuals is supplemented by a system of general and mutual dependence through or by means of the products. In the first place, he clearly enunciates that the money-form of commodities is only the further development of the simple form of value — i.e., of the expression of the value of one com- modity in some other commodity taken at random; for he says — 5 beds=lhouse (xXfvai ttsvts avii oixizq,) is not to be distinguished from 5 beds=so much money. Nature's direct gift to him is plenty of leisure time. Withdrawn from circulation, they become petrified into a hoard, and though they remained in that state till doomsday, not a single farthing would accrue to them. Les impots directs, les corvees, les servitudes de tout genre, ecrasent le cultivateur allemand, qui paie encore des impots indirects dans tout ce qu'il achete.... When the steam-engine transplanted the factories from the country waterfalls to the middle of towns, the "abstemious" surplus-val- ue maker found the child-material ready to his hand, without being forced to seek slaves from the workhouses. Still the two fundamental forms must be briefly worked out here. Destined for productive consumption from the very first, this por- tion exists, for the most part, in the shape of articles totally un- fitted for individual consumption. it is rather a man's dress, and I believe in some cases, it drowns all sense of decency." "Do the women smoke?" "Some do." "And I suppose it is very dirty work?" "Very dirty." "They get black and grimy?" "As black as those who are down the mines ... According to Eschwege, the total produce of the Brazilian diamond mines for the eighty years, ending in 1823, had not realised the price of one-and-a-half years' average produce of the sugar and coffee plantations of the same country, although the diamonds cost much more labour, and therefore represented more value. These above all must disappear. It will be remembered how this law was carried out in the country districts: in the form of alms the parish made up the nominal wage to the nominal sum required for the simple veg- etation of the labourer. of Fact., 31 Oct., 1856," p. c, p. By this an end was put to the relay system once for all. Hence the preponderant role that the colonial sys- tem plays at that time. Just as at first the capitalist is relieved from actual la- bour so soon as his capital has reached that minimum amount with which capitalist production, as such, begins, so now, he hands over the work of direct and constant supervision of the individual workmen, and groups of workmen, to a special kind of wage-la- bourer. worked from 6 p. "By his own labour and that of his forefathers," answer unanimously the spokesmen of Po- litical Economy. Econ. From the point of view then of capitalist production, the whole process appears as the spontaneous variation of the origi- nally constant value, which is transformed into labour-power. Say, re- marks on this point: "Where division of labour is well developed, the skill of the labourer is available only in that particular branch in which it has been MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 441 stream of men, who furnish a contingent from which to fill up vacancies, and to draw a supply for expansion. The reason of this is easily comprehensible. Originally, Political Economy was studied by philoso- phers like Hobbes, Locke, Hume; by businessmen and statesmen, like Thomas More, Temple, Sully, De Witt, North, Law, Vanderlint, Cantillon, Franklin; and especially, and with the greatest success, by medical men like Petty, Barbon, Mandeville, Quesnay. I get 3 shillings and sixpence. Polit." 158 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION the exchange, a value equal to that which he acquired by means of that operation." 1 The result is not altered by introducing money, as a medium of circulation, between the commodities, and making the sale and the purchase two distinct acts. It therefore pre-supposes a specific mode, the capitalist mode of production, a mode which, along with its methods, means, and conditions, arises and devel- ops itself spontaneously on the foundation afforded by the formal subjection of labour to capital. Almost all of them bemoan the slavery of the factory operative. m 15 minutes. 7-. . Exchange-value, at first sight, presents itself as a quantita- tive relation, as the proportion in which values in use of one sort are exchanged for those of another sort, 3 a relation constantly changing with time and place. On looking at her signature, however, in the school certificate books, I noticed that she spelt it in various ways, while her handwriting left no 1 L. Hat-making: 1851, 15,957: 1861, 13,814. Taking the exchange of commodities as our basis, our first assumption was that capitalist and labourer met as free persons, as independent owners of commodities; the one pos- sessing money and means of production, the other labour-power. If she fail, or do not try independently, she must join an establishment, where her labour is not less, but where her money is safe. Of cities and townes either utterly decaied or more than a quarter or half diminished, though some one be a little increased here or there; of townes pulled downe for sheepe-walks, and no more but the lordships now standing in them ... 20.) MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 403 b. In order to inform us that its sublime reality as value is not the same as its buckram body, it says that value has the appearance of a coat, and consequently that so far as the linen is value, it and the coat are as like as two peas. Assuming this product to be 10 lbs. 74.) 154 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION itself by throwing of! surplus-value from itself; the original value, in other words, expands spontaneously. 700 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION INCREASE OR DECREASE IN THE AREA UNDER CULTIVATION, PRODUCT Increase or Product Acres of Cultivated Land Decrease, 1865 Product per Acre 1864 1865 1864 Wheat, 276,483 266,989 9,494 Wheat, cwt., 13.3 Oats 1,814,886 1,745,228 69,658 Oats, . Report, Lond 1864, p. Hence it was in this industry that, in the first half of the 18th century, the most experiments were 380 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION manifests itself. 137, n. In the quadrupled product there lies four times as much raw material. 2 Ure, 1. . who maintain ... There they are to be seen in the unwholesome brass-foundries, button facto- ries, enamelling, galvanising, and lackering works. .... Mr. Baynes, of Blackburn, in a lecture published in 1858, estimates that "each real mechanical horse-power 2 will drive 450 1 Ricardo lays such stress on this effect of machinery (of which, in other connexions, he takes no more notice than he does of the general distinc- tion between the labour process and the process of creating surplus-value), that he occasionally loses sight of the value given up by machines to the prod- uct, and puts machines on the same looting as natural forces. ... MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 355 ence the cyclopean machines now employed in the construction of prime movers. Twelve hours' work, as is evident from the facts ad- duced, is now compressed into less than 10 hours. Carmarthenshire is the breeding ground of the mining population and their hospital. Sanderson, of the firm of Sanderson, Bros., & Co., steel rolling-mills and forges, Attercliffe, says: "Great difficulty would be caused by preventing boys un- der 18 from working at night. On the contrary, it is generally by their imperfections as products, that the means of production in any process assert themselves in their character of products. per rood. With reference, therefore, to use- value, there is good ground for saying that "exchange is a trans- action by which both sides gain." 1 It is otherwise with exchange- value. If, then, as we have already seen, there can be no change of absolute magnitude in the value of labour-power, and in surplus-value, unaccompanied by a change in their rela- tive magnitudes, so now it follows that no change in their relative magnitudes is possible, without a previous change in the absolute magnitude of the value of labour-power. 2 In the Compte Rendu of the International Statistical Congress at Paris, 1855, it is stated: "The French law, which limits the length of daily labour in factories and workshops to 12 hours, does not confine this work to definite fixed hours. J. Nevertheless, the elementary form of value passes by an easy transition into a more complete form. Here we contemplate the labour as producing a par- ticular article; we view it under its qualitative aspect alone, with regard to its end and aim. But such a proposition has not the semblance of probability. . c, 85, p. It will further be remembered that, with the development of the capitalist mode of production, there is an increase in the minimum amount of individual capital nec- essary to carry on a business under its normal conditions. The one workman therefore gives occupation directly to the other. 8.) The wished-for goal of English capital is no longer Continental wages but Chinese. In order to be able to extract value from the consumption of a commodity, our friend, Moneybags, must be so lucky as to find, within the sphere of circulation, in the market, a commodity, whose use-value possesses the peculiar property of being a source of value, whose actual consumption, therefore, is itself an em- bodiment of labour, and, consequently, a creation of value. He has bought the use of the labour-power for a definite period, and he insists upon his rights. Each piece of money is a mere coin, or means of circulation, only so long as it actually circulates. c, pp. . It was "the strange God" who perched him- self on the altar cheek by jowl with the old Gods of Europe, and one fine day with a shove and a kick chucked them all of a heap. Let us see, in the first place, what the two forms have in common. Yet we know by experience that a circulation of commodi- ties relatively primitive, suffices for the production of all these forms. . Ireland, having during the last twenty years reduced its population by nearly one half, is at this moment undergoing the process of still further reducing the num- ber of its inhabitants, so as exactly to suit the requirements of its landlords and of the English woollen manufacturers. 1 We must now examine more closely this peculiar commodity, labour-power. The produc- tion of surplus-value— in the form hitherto considered by us — by means of simple extension of the working-day, proved, therefore, to be independent of any change in the mode of production itself. * SECTION 2.— THE REPRESENTATION OF THE COMPONENTS OF THE VALUE OF THE PRODUCT BY CORRESPONDING PROPORTIONAL PARTS OF THE PRODUCT ITSELF Let us now return to the example by which we were shown how the capitalist converts money into capital. c). A real machinery system, however, does not take the place of these independent machines, until the subject of labour goes through a connected series of detail processes, that are carried out by a chain of machines of various kinds, the one supple- menting the other. The masses of capital fused together overnight by centrali- sation reproduce and multiply as the others do, only more rapidly, thereby becoming new and powerful levers in social accumu- lation. 2 "The Labour, that is the economic time, of society, is a given portion, say ten hours a day of a million of people, or ten million hours.... Many of them died of starvation, many with families vege- tated for a long time on2-^d. Torrens: "On Wages and Combina- tion." London, 1834, p. c, p. Amongst other things he says this: "An idle learning being little better than the learning of idle- ness . c, pp. This Act was a complete dead letter owing to the ridic- ulously small number of inspectors, the meagreness of their powers, and other causes that will become apparent as we proceed. These individual differences, or "errors" as they are called in mathematics, compensate one another, and vanish, whenever a certain minimum number of workmen are employed together. 15, 16.) In all Belgium are 930,000 families, of whom, according to the official statistics, 90,000 are wealthy and on the list of voters =450,000 persons; 390,000 families of the lower THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 673 middle-class in towns and villages, the greater part of them con- stantly sinking into the proletariat, =1,950,000 persons. The constitution of these communities varies in different parts of India. For the rest, the pleasant life that the peasant led under Frederick's system of finance and hodge-podge rule of despotism, bureau- cracy and feudalism, may be seen from the following quotation from his ad- mirer, Mirabeau: "Le lin fait done une des grandes richesses du cultivateur dans le Nord de l'Allemagne. Wages, 4 shillings a week. that the ordinary agricultural la- bourers in Scotland very seldom get any meat at all." Answer No. 3047. Now, as the proportion of the num- ber of farthings requisite in commerce is to be taken from the number of people, the frequency of their exchanges: as also, and principally, from the value of the smallest silver pieces of money; so in like manner, the propor- tion of money [gold and silver specie] requisite in our trade, is to be like- wise taken from the frequency of commutations, and from the bigness of the payments." (William Petty, "A Treatise of Taxes and Contributions." Lond. of Nations." Hertford, 1852, p. provides shoes and clothing and pays the rent, and thus enables the family to be better fed." 2 One of the most remarkable results of the inquiry was that the agricultural labourer of England, as compared with other parts of the United Kingdom, "is considerably the worst fed," as the ap- pended table shows: Quantities of Carbon and Nitrogen weekly consumed by an average agricultural adult: Carbon, Nitrogen, grains grains England . It rises with rising and falls with falling productiveness. The greater part of all other commodities, especially in the imperfectly developed stages of civil society, will continue for a long time to be estimated by the former antiquated and illusory value of the measure of value. 2 1 Eden, 1. So also, owing to the abundance of clothing materials produced by machinery, the number of tailors, seamstresses and needle- women, went on increasing until the appearance of the sewing- machine. If its owner therefore offers it for sale at three shillings a day, its selling price is equal to its value, and according to our supposition, our friend Money- bags, who is intent upon converting his three shillings into capi- tal, pays this value. Consequently the tension and the amount of labour-power expended become monstrous, and especially so in the case of the children who are condemned to this torture. On the contrary, each of the two contracting parties in every case, gives a less for a greater value. 1 Drainage on the most extensive scale, new methods of stall-feeding, and of the artificial cultivation of green crops, introduction of mechanical manuring apparatus, new treatment of clay soils, increased use of mineral manures, employ- ment of the steam-engine, and of all kinds of new machinery, more intensive cultivation generally, characterised this epoch. E. c, p. The chain of which each equation of value is a link, is liable at any moment to be lengthened by each new kind of commodity that comes into existence and furnishes the material for a fresh expression of value. The values of the means of production, i.e., the cotton and the spindle, which values are expressed in the price of twelve shil- lings, are therefore constituent parts of the value of the yarn, or, in other words, of the value of the product. Even in the coal and metal mines, labourers of both sexes, and all ages, are consumed, in perfect "freedom," at any period, and through any length of time. In Mr. Horner's district 10,270 adult male labourers were thus examined in 181 factories. "Spare the hand that grinds the corn, Oh, miller girls, and softly sleep. M. If he come a few minutes late, he is punished; if he come 10 minutes late, he is not allowed to enter until after breakfast, and thus loses a quarter of a day's wage. 3 Tbe author of "Observations" and S. Since the price of the labour-power is five shillings, 6 articles repre- 3 sent the necessary labour-time, and 3— articles the surplus-labour. The life-long speciality of handling one and the same tool, now becomes the life-long speciality of serving one and the same machine. That part of the tribute exacted by him which he accumulates, is said to be saved 1 In his description of the process of reproduction, and of accumula- tion, Adam Smith, in many ways, not only made no advance, but even lost considerable ground, compared with his predecessors, especially by the Phys- iocrats. 2 "The first (natural wealth) as it is most noble and advantageous, so doth it make the people careless, proud, and given to all excesses; whereas the second enforceth vigilancy, literature, arts and policy." ("England's Treasure by Foreign Trade. . Of course the distinction is practically made, since this school treats labour, at one time under its quantitative aspect, at another under its qual- itative aspect. In fact, the revolution i "Sixth Report on Public Health," Lond., 1864, p. On leaving the warehouses at 9 or 10 o'clock at night, the children are often given a bundle of lace to take home with them and finish. lbs. Now if we also reckon the remaining £1,000, which still con- tinues in the machinery, as transferred to the product, we ought also to reckon it as part of the value advanced, and thus make it appear on both sides of our calculation. Greater outlay of capital per acre, and, as a consequence, more rapid concentra- tion of farms, were essential conditions of the new method. A certain quantity of iron therefore serves as the measure of the weight of the sugar, and represents, in relation to the sugar-loaf, weight embodied, the form of manifestation of weight. Suppose the working-day consists of 6 hours of necessary labour, and 6 hours of surplus-labour. Whether, then, a commodity assumes the relative form, or the opposite equivalent form, depends entirely upon its accidental position in the expression of value— that is, upon whether it is the commodity whose value is being expressed or the commod- ity in which value is being expressed. But not in its natural way. 3 1. By this Parliamentary escamotage the means which the labourers could use in a strike or lock-out were withdrawn from the laws common to all citizens, and placed under exceptional penal legislation, the interpretation of which fell to the masters themselves in their capacity as justices of the peace. : r ft but by the ca- working-day ot a given number or hours J pacity for work of the producer. We have further seen that the capitalist buys with the same capital a greater mass of labour-power, as he pro- gressively replaces skilled labourers by less skilled, mature labour- power by immature, male by female, that of adults by that of young persons or children. x The same characters can, however, be assumed independently of the circulation of commodities. And then, we must not forget, that the so-called skilled labour does not occupy a large space in the field of national labour. 24, s. ... North, 1. But, so far as he is personified capital, it is not values in use and the enjoyment of them, but exchange-value and its augmentation, that spur him into action. it cannot be doubted that such legislation would have a most beneficent effect, not only 1 "Ch. Empl. Let him therefore console himself with the reflection that virtue is its own reward. Up to this point it has been assumed that the increase or diminution of the variable capital corresponds rigidly with the increase or diminution of the number of labourers employed. in the jack- frame and drawing-frame room, about one-third less in expense, and likewise one-third less in hands; in the spinning-room about one-third less in expenses. and II., we see that the same change of magnitude in relative value may arise from to- tally opposite causes. . of yarn. 1 Thus the minimum of wages becomes a law of Nature to them. 3 On this point let us listen to two heart-broken cries. 'or 12x100 working-hours; and its total value-product, the equivalent of the variable capital advanced plus the surplus- value, can, day in, day out, never reach the sum of 1 ,200s. 19. of yarn out of air, or, as if he had spun them with the aid of cotton and spindles, that, being the spontaneous gift of Nature, transferred no value to the product. Each pound of the cotton bought at six- pence, and worked up after the rise in value, transfers to the product a value of one shilling; and the cotton already spun before the rise, and perhaps circulating in the market as yarn, likewise transfers to the product twice its original value. c, pp. There is here no antagonism, as in the case of hoarding, between the money and commodities. i.) The celebrated passage in the same chapter that begins with the words, "Observe the accommodation of the most common artificer or day-labourer in a civilised and thriving country," &c, and then proceeds to depict what DIVISION OF LABOUR AND MANUFACTURE 355 independent labours of the cattle-breeder, the tanner, and the shoemaker? Hence the use that can be made of the total annual product, depends entirely upon its own composition, but in no way upon circulation. 1 It may be said, that the whole economic history of society is summed up in the movement of this antithesis. Later on, we try to decipher the hieroglyphic, to get behind the secret of our own social products; for to stamp an object of utility as a value, is just as much a social product as language. An immeasurable interval of time sepa- rates the state of things in which a man brings his labour-power to market for sale as a commodity, from that state in which hu- man labour was still in its first instinctive stage. From his standpoint of juridical illusion, he does not regard the law as a product of the material relations of production, but conversely the relations of production as products of the law. But the two latter factors have increased enormously since those days. he thinks that were more money in the country, he should have a price for his goods. . . Thus, we have a result absurd at first sight— that labour which creates a value of 6s. 41 .) Nevertheless, even with regard to ma- terial production, o-itapxeia, as opposed to division of labour remained their ideal, "7tap'covYap to, eo, napa xootcov xat to auTapxe?." It should be mentioned here that at the date of the fall of the 30 Tyrants there were still not 5,000 Athenians without landed property. In the primitive Indian community there is social division of labour, without production of commodities. 346 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION If, therefore, the same labourer has, day after day, to perform the same operation, there must be a different number of labourers for each operation; for instance, in type manufacture, there are four founders and two breakers to one rubber: the founder casts 2,000 type an hour, the breaker breaks up 4,000, and the rubber polishes 8,000. 35. The requisite number of hours is made up each six months, by instalments consisting of from 3 to 5 hours at a time, spreading over, perhaps, the whole six months. Free competition brings out the inherent laws of capitalist production, in the shape of external coercive laws having power over every individual capitalist. THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 657 will have been no adequate protection — dwelling space will have been stinted to the degree in which over-crowding produces or increases disease; of household utensils and furniture there will have been scarcely any — even cleanliness will have been found costly or difficult, and if there still be self-respectful endeavours to maintain it, every such endeavour will represent additional pangs of hunger. The labourer himself is called a "bondsman." The rela- tionship here set up also shows how individual consumption by the labourer becomes consumption on behalf of capital — or productive consumption— from quite a new point of view: "It is curious to observe that the very dung of the hind and bondsman is the perquisite of the calculating lord ...and the lord will allow no privy but his own to exist in the neighbourhood, and will rather give a bit of manure here and there for a garden than bate any part of his seigneurial right." ("Public Health, Report VII., 1864," p. Fawcett, I. It is this last part of the handicraftsman's implement that is first seized upon by the indus- trial revolution, leaving to the workman, in addition to his new labour of watching the machine with his eyes and correcting its mistakes with his hands, the merely mechanical part of being the moving power. 232, 233. Empl. The iron, in the expres- sion of the weight of the sugar-loaf, represents a natural property common to both bodies, namely their weight; but the coat, in the expression of value of the linen, represents a non-natural property of both, something purely social, namely, their value. We have its result without the intermediate stage, in the form M— M', "en style lapidaire" so to say, money that is worth more money, value that is greater than itself. Furnaces and workshops that stand idle by night, and absorb no living labour, are "a mere loss" to the capi- talist. The subsequent publication of Rodbertus' letters to Rud. When a certain stage of development has been reached, a conventional degree of prodi- gality, which is also an exhibition of wealth, and consequently a source of credit, becomes a business necessity to the "unfortunate" capitalist. "The real earnings of the cotton weaver are now far less than they were; his superiority over the common labourer, which at first was very great, has now almost entirely ceased. When treating of use-value, we always assume to be dealing with definite quantities, such as dozens of watches, yards of linen, or tons of iron. +£90 var.-f £90 surpl.; but £90 is a given and therefore a constant quantity; hence it appears absurd to treat it as variable. 3 Marie Augier: "Du Credit Public." Paris, 1842. Just as little as the commodities that the capitalist buys with a part of the surplus-value for his own consumption, serve the purpose of production and of creation of value, so little is the labour that he buys for the satisfaction of his natural and social require- ments, productive labour. But the law of value in its international application is yet more modified by this, that on the world-market the more produc- tive national labour reckons also as the more intense, so long as the more productive nation is not compelled by competition to lower the selling price of its commodities to the level of their value. m., and are en- gaged in making the bread, with one or two short (sometimes very short) intervals of rest, up to 8 o'clock the next morning. What confirms them in this view, is the peculiar circumstance that the use-value of objects is realised without exchange, by means of a direct relation between the objects and man, while, on the other hand, their value is real- ised only by exchange, that is, by means of a social process. Live five miles off. 466. On the other hand, because a part of what is now surplus- labour, would then count as necessary labour; I mean the labour of forming a fund for reserve and accumulation. If they run away, they are to become up to this age the slaves of their masters, who can put them in irons, whip them, &c, if they like. He convinces himself with immense satis- faction, that he is a different being, by treating the one unmercifully and damaging the other con amore. But the sale is the first act of a process that ends with a transaction of an opposite nature, namely, the purchase of a Bible; the purchase of the linen, on the other hand, ends a movement that began with a transac- tion of an opposite nature, namely, with the sale of the wheat. l Therefore, the final result of every separate circuit, in which a purchase and consequent sale are completed, forms of itself the starting-point of a new circuit. Moreover, not only were new huge silver deposits discovered in North America, in the Western part of the Rocky Mountains, but these and the Mexican silver mines were really opened up by the laying of railways, which made possible the shipment of modern machinery and fuel and in consequence the mining of silver on a very large scale at a low cost. m., after 6 p. This juridical relation, which thus expresses itself in a contract, whether such contract be part of a developed legal system or not, is a relation between two wills, and is but the reflex of the real economic relation between the two. In formulating this law, Ricardo overlooked one circumstance; although a change in the magnitude of the surplus-value or sur- plus-labour causes a change in the opposite direction in the magni- tude of the value of labour-power, or in the quantity of necessary labour, it by no means follows that they vary in the same propor- tion. 62. . The circumstances may or may not be ripe for such a separation. The expenses of this education (excessively small in the case of ordinary labour-power), enter pro tanto into the total value spent in its production. of 1866, states: "It is unhappily, to a painful degree, apparent throughout the whole of the evidence, that against no persons do the children of both sexes so much require protection as against their parents." The system of unlimited exploitation of chil- dren's labour in general and the so-called home-labour in particu- lar is "maintained only because the parents are able, without check or control, to exercise this arbitrary and mischievous pow- er over their young and tender offspring. The additional capital annually transported abroad to be put out at interest is in much greater proportion to the annual accumulation than the yearly emigration is to the yearly increase of population. d. 216. 280. But the employment of machinery does away with the necessity of crys- tallising this distribution after the manner of Manufacture, by the constant annexation of a particular man to a particular function. In it the actual horse-power of the modern steam engines and water-wheels appears in place of the nominal. They both augment the mass of articles produced in a given time. 333, 334. On the continent of Europe, after Colbert's example, the process was much simplified. 2 "Child. The large workshop 1 "Je permettrai," says the capitalist, "que vous ayez l'honneur de me servir, a condition que vous me donnez le peu qui vous reste pour la peine que je prends de vous commander." (J.J. Rousseau: "Discours sur l'Economie Po- litique.") REACTION OP THE AGRICULTURAL REVOLUTION 747 (manufacture reunie) will enrich prodigiously one or two entre- preneurs, but the labourers will only be journeymen, paid more or less, and will not have any share in the success of the undertaking. Soon after this the June insurrection in Paris and its bloody suppression united, in England as on the Continent, all fractions of the ruling classes, landlords and capitalists, stock-exchange wolves and shop-keepers, Protectionists and Free-traders, government and opposition, priests and freethink- ers, young whores and old nuns, under the common cry for the salvation of Property, Religion, the Family and Society. The stock of human happiness is thereby much increased, whilst the more delicate are not only relieved from drudg- ery. In 1844, 2,400 stretches, making a total of 4,800; and in some cases the amount of labour required is even still greater . With two coats two men can be clothed, with 46 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION one coat only one man. THE WORKING-DAY 271 English Labour Statutes from the 14th century to well into the middle of the 18th. They always employ their own children, if they have any." (1. There is no indul- gence, no forbearance for the sick, the feeble, the aged, for woman's weak- 236 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION But as soon as people, whose production still moves within the lower forms of slave-labour, corvee-labour, &c, are drawn into the whirlpool of an international market dominated by the capi- talistic mode of production, the sale of their products for export becoming their principal interest, the civilised horrors of over- work are grafted on the barbaric horrors of slavery, serfdom, &c. Therefore, whether value appears in cotton, in a spindle, or in yarn, makes no differ- ence in the amount of that value. Capital, therefore, is not only, as Adam Smith says, the com- mand over labour. But this transformation itself can only take place under certain circumstances that centre in this, viz., that two very different kinds of commodity-possessors must come face to face and into contact; on the one hand, the owners of money, means of production, means of subsistence, who are eager to increase the sum of values they possess, by buying other people's labour-power; on the other hand, free labourers, the sellers of their own labour-power, and therefore the sellers of labour. Engels, 1. MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 401 doubt as to her unfitness to teach. By that Act, "every child, before being employed in a print work must have attended school for at least 30 days, and not less than 150 hours, during the six months immedi- ately preceding such first day of employment, and during the continuance of its employment in the print works, it must attend for a like period of 30 days, and 150 hours during every successive period of six months.... But according as these private individuals are labourers or not labourers, private property has a different character. 2 c. G. . 602 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION which the English Dogberries acted in their "legal" fixing of a wages tariff: "The squires of Norfolk had dined, says Mr. Burke, when they fixed the rate of wages; the squires of Berks evidently thought the labourers ought not to do so, when they fixed the rate of wages at Speenhamland, 1795 There they decide that 'income (weekly) should be 3s., for a man,' when the gallon or half- peck loaf of 8 lbs. 1815, p. 392 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION for separating the wool from the seed, an instrument, half machine, half tool, called a churka; with this one man and a woman can clean 28 lbs. xl., xli. The result is therefore the same if he in the one case is employed only for 7 J / 2 , in the other only for 3 hours. Once more we find the earth to be a universal in- strument of this sort, for it furnishes a locus standi to the labourer and a field of employment for his activity. The profits of manufacturers were enormous; but this only whetted the appetite that it should have satisfied, and therefore the man- ufacturers had recourse to an expedient that seemed to secure to them those profits without any possibility of limit; they began the practice of what is termed "night-working," that is, having tired one set of hands, by working them throughout the day, they had another set ready to go on working throughout the night; the day-set getting into the beds that the night-set had just quit- ted, and in their turn again, the night-set getting into the beds that the day-set quitted in the morning. 1 It seemed, however, doubtful whether this effect was pro- duced in the factory proper, where the dependence of the workman on the continuous and uniform motion of the machinery had al- ready created the strictest discipline. Now at home, in one room, starv- ing, or near to it, then engaged 15, 16, aye, even 18 hours out of the 24, in an air that is scarcely tolerable, and on food which, even if it be good, cannot be digested in the absence of pure air. more and younger children are employed in them." (1. An abstract law of population exists for plants and animals only, and only in so far as man has not interfered with them. 314 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION obtained only by lowering the wages of the labourer below the val- ue of his labour-power. On the 15th August, 1867, the Factory Acts Extension Act, and on the 21st August, the Workshops' Regulation Act received the Royal Assent; the former Act having reference to large indus- tries, the latter to small. m., Saturdays included, and that the workpeople there, when under English overlookers, did not supply during this time quite so much product as the English in 10 hours, but under German overlookers much less. The thoroughly "respectable" British jurymen answered by a verdict that sent them to the next assizes on a charge of man- slaughter, and, in a gentle "rider" to their verdict, expressed the pious hope that the capitalistic magnates of the railways would, in future, be more extravagant in the purchase of a sufficient quantity of labour-power, and more "abstemious," more "self- denying," more "thrifty," in the draining of paid labour-power. 1 11 Bower Street, No. 41 ... The list of documents collected by this commission is to be seen in the catalogue of the "Twickenham Economic Museum." Very important are the official "Re- ports on Public Health." See also Eduard Reich, M. 135.) To be sure, the matter looks quite different if we consider capitalist production in the uninterrupted flow of its renewal, and if, in place of the individual capitalist and the individual worker, we view them in their totality, the capitalist class and the working-class confronting each other. 172 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION perpetuates himself, by procreation." 1 The labour-power with- drawn from the market by wear and tear and death, must be continually replaced by, at the very least, an equal amount of fresh labour-power. Nor here is it even needful to consider where it would be that, if decent accommodation were provided, the cost . If the slave is absent a fortnight, he is condemned to slavery for life and is to be branded on forehead or back with the letter S; if he runs away thrice, he is to be executed as a felon. The general character of the labour-process is evidently not changed by the fact, that the labourer works for the capitalist instead of for him- self; moreover, the particular methods and operations employed in bootmaking or spinning are not immediately changed by the intervention of the capitalist. Eden strongly recommends the Rumfordian beggar-soup to workhouse overseers, and reproachfully warns the English labourers that "many poor people, particularly in Scotland, live, and that very comfortably, for months together, upon oat-meal and barley-meal, mixed with only water and salt." (1. Calico-printing: 1851, 12,098: 1861, 12,556. With the accumu- lation of capital, therefore, the number of capitalists grows to a greater or less extent. This article either results from the mere mechani- cal fitting together of partial products made independently, or owes its completed shape to a series of connected processes and manipulations. The apparently single process is in reality a double one. But those means of production play a double part. His average wage expressed in pints of wheat was from 1770 to 1771, 90 pints, in Eden's time (1797) only 65, in 1808 but 60. 2 It is not the tropics with their luxuriant vegetation, but the temperate zone, that is the mother-country of capital. 2 1 Tuckett is aware that the modern woollen industry has sprung, with the introduction of machinery, from manufacture proper and from the destruc- tion of rural and domestic industries. Placed thus, she becomes a mere slave, tossed about with the variations of society. It is his labour of last week, or of last year, that pays for his labour-power this week or this year. 1 Such a crisis occurs only where the ever-lengthening chain of payments, and an artificial system of settling them, has been fully developed. The seller has his commodity replaced by gold, the buyer has his gold replaced by a commodity. Pottery, as we saw, is one of the shortest-lived industries. This law holds generally. But the middle ages had handed down two distinct forms of capital, which mature in the most different economic social formations, and which, before the era of the capitalist mode of production, are considered as capi- tal quand meme — usurer's capital and merchant's capital. "Cooling" is the techni- cal expression for their occasional escape from the drying-rooms into the fresh air. All commodities are non-use-values for their owners, and use-values for their non- owners. 2 1. 1 As the conscious representative of this movement, the pos- sessor of money becomes a capitalist. The reason is simply that, with the increasing productivity of labour, not only does the mass of the means of production consumed by it increase, but their value compared with their mass diminishes. This common "something" cannot be either a geometrical, a chemical, or any other natural property of commodities. It must not be forgotten that the East- end of London, which is here dealt with, is not only the seat of the iron shipbuilding mentioned above, but also of a so-called "home-industry" always underpaid. The complete circulation, which begins with the receipt, concludes with the payment, of money for commodi- ties. The experience of the three following years showed that such an attempt must come to grief against the resistance of the adult it. Only when and where wage-labour is its basis does com- modity production impose itself upon society as a whole; but only then and there also does it unfold all its hidden potentialities. Price remarks on p. First, the preliminary stage, consisting of the preparation of the components of the glass, mixing the sand and lime, &c, and melt- 1 "When (from the peculiar nature of the produce of each manufactory), the number of processes into which it is most advantageous to divide it is ascertained, as well as the number of individuals to be employed, then all other manufactories which do not employ a direct multiple of this number will produce the article at a greater cost.... "Our capital," says one of the charac- ters in the melodrama, "was ready for many operations which require a considerable period of time for their completion; but we could not begin such operations with labour which, we knew, would soon leave us. is the money expression for 24 hours of realised labour. The estates of the church were to a large extent given away to rapacious royal favourites, or sold at a nominal price to speculating farmers and citizens, who drove out, en masse, the hereditary sub-tenants and threw their holdings into one. During this period of 45 years the English man- ufacturers had a monopoly of machinery and of the markets of the world. carts, ploughs, spades, and so forth, without a given portion of the first, are nothing at all." (Edmund Burke: "Thoughts and Details on Scarcity, originally presented to the Right Hon. Note further: If only the nai- vete of the schoolmaster could apply, to the conditions of produc- tion and population of the nineteenth century, the standard of the 14th, this naivete, into the bargain, overlooked the fact that whilst, after the plague and the decimation that accompanied it, followed on this side of the Channel, in England, enfranchisement and enrichment of the agricultural population, on that side, in France, followed greater servitude and more misery. "And even in the former case" (when the work- man is a wage-labourer to whom the capitalist advances all the necessaries of life, he the labourer), "may be looked upon in the same light" (i.e., as a capitalist), "since, contributing his labour at less than the market-price, (!) he may be regarded as lending * On the basis of a suggestion Marx made to N. For example, the outlay on raw material is 30 times as great, for the capitalist who employs 300 men, as it is for each of the 30 cap- italists who employ 10 men. Sullivan sold his contract to one Binn for £40,000; Binn sold it the same day for £60,000, and the ultimate pur- chaser who carried out the contract declared that after all he realised an enormous gain. The isolated group of labourers to whom any particular detail function is assigned, is made up of homogeneous elements, and is one of the constituent parts of the total mechanism. Part of the agri- cultural population is therefore constantly on the point of passing over into an urban or manufacturing proletariat, and on the look-out for circumstances favourable to this transformation. 2 "No one... (n. 1 Dr. Edward Smith, during the cotton crisis caused by the American Civil War, was sent by the English Government to Lancashire, Cheshire, and other places, to report on the sanitary condition of the cotton operatives. 166. Ferguson. The Manuscript is entitled: "The character and behaviour of King William, Sun- derland, etc., as represented in Original Letters to the Duke of Shrewsbury from Somers Halifax, Oxford, Secretary Vernon, etc." It is full of curiosa. of Fact, for Quarter ending 30th September, 1844, and from 1st October, 1844, to 30th April, 1845, p. THE WORKING-DAY 241 "Five minutes a day's increased work, multiplied by weeks, are equal to two and a half days of produce in the year." 1 "An additional hour a day gained by small instalments be- fore 6 a. c, Appendix, p. Think- ing it was a mistake, he applied to the time-keeper, ... 2 Malthus, "Inquiry into the Nature and Progress of Rent," Lond., 1815. 192 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION seen before to what results such asceticism leads. In two weeks he incorporates twice as much labour, and therefore twice as much value, as in one week, and during the same time he consumes twice as much material, and wears out twice as much machinery, of double the value in each case; he therefore preserves, in the product of two weeks, twice as much value as in the product of one week. Finally, in what is called manufacturing industry, every additional expenditure of labour pre-supposes a corresponding additional expenditure of raw materials, but not necessarily of instruments of labour. Eden refutes his own crafty special pleading, in which he tries to represent com- munal property as the private property of the great landlords who have taken the place of the feudal lords, when he, himself, 1 Read, e.g., E. The cottages of the agricultural labourers are the places where the work is usually carried on. It then goes through the second phase of its circulation, not under its own natural shape, but under the shape of money. He must eat, drink and sleep at word of command... THE WORKING-DAY 277 lowing proper time for meals, in such manner that there shall remain 12 hours of neat-labour." 1 Twelve working-hours daily in the Ideal Workhouse, in the "House of Terror" of 1770! 63 years later, in 1833, when the English Parliament reduced the working-day for children of 13 to 18, in four branches of industry to 12 full hours, the judgment day of English Industry had dawned! In 1852, when Louis Bonaparte sought to secure his position with the bourgeoisie by tampering with the legal working-day, the French people cried out with one voice "the law that limits the working-day to 12 hours is the one good that has remained to us of the legislation of the Republic!" 2 At Zurich the work of children over 10, is limited to 12 hours; in Aargau in 1862, the work of children between 13 and 16, was reduced from 12-^- to 12 hours; in Austria in 1860, for children between 14 and 16, the same reduction was made. 4 However, the principle had triumphed with its victory in those great branches of industry which form the most character- istic creation of the modern mode of production. (e.) The British Agricultural Proletariat Nowhere does the antagonistic character of capitalistic pro- duction and accumulation assert itself more brutally than in the progress of English agriculture (including cattle-breeding) and the retrogression of the English agricultural labourer. The value of one commodity is to the value of any other, as the labour-time necessary for the production of the one is to that necessary for the production of the 1 "The value of them (the necessaries of life), when they are exchanged the one for another, is regulated by the quantity of labour necessarily re- quired, and commonly taken in producing them." ("Some Thoughts on the Interest of Money in General, and Particularly in the Publick Funds, &c." Lond., p. But, in that case, I must reverse the equation, in order to express the value of the coat relatively; and, so soon as I do that, the linen becomes the equivalent instead of the coat. The proof is easily given, i "Rept. 12,680 . . The owner of the money has paid the value of a day's labour-power; his, therefore, is the use of it for a day, a 194 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION day's labour belongs to him. See Karl Marx, 1. The same necessaries of life, at half the price, would form just as much muscle and bone, just as much vigour, but not vigour of the same value This confusion of "value" and "vigour" coupled with our author's Pharisaical indefiniteness, mark an attempt, futile for all that, to thrash out an explanation of surplus-value from a mere re-appearance of pre- existing values. iv., v., vi. Form B shows that only one single commodity at a time can completely expand its relative value, and that it acquires this expanded form only because, and in so far as, all other commodities are, with respect to it, equivalents. his cottage .... Rent? x., p. Of those under 20,835 were between 5 and 10 years, 30,701 between 10 and 15 years, 42,010 between 15 and 19 years. It reads all prices backwards, and thus, so to say, depicts itself in the bodies of all other commodities, which offer to it the material for the realisation of its own use-value. The monopoly of capital becomes a fetter upon the mode of pro- duction, which has sprung up and flourished along with, and under it. To purchase the labour- power of a family of four workers may, perhaps, cost more than it formerly did to purchase the labour-power of the head of the family, but, in return, four days' labour takes the place of one, and their price falls in proportion to the excess of the surplus-labour of four over the surplus-labour of one. Engels' "Lage, etc." pp 249-51. . It is, besides, constantly interrupted by the technical progress that at one time virtually supplies the place of new workmen, at another, actually displaces old ones. The Inquiry Commission of 1862 also proposed a new regu- lation of the mining industry, an industry distinguished from others by the exceptional characteristic that the interests of land- lord and capitalist there join hands. Nor is this nearly all the toil which the distance occa- sions him. They receive cottages and coal for firing "for nothing" — i.e., these form part of their wages, paid in kind. Under ordinary circumstances the children attend school morning and afternoon for 30 days, for at least 5 hours each day, and upon the expiration of the 30 days, the statutory total of 150 hours having been attained, having, in their 1 Sir John Kincaid in "Rep. In the first form the movement is brought about by the intervention of money, in the second by that of a commodity. The heat, partly due to the gas stoves used for warming the irons, is horrible Even when moderate hours of work, i.e., from 8 in the morning till 6 in the evening, prevail in such places, yet 3 or 4 persons fall into a swoon regularly every day." 2 The revolution in the industrial methods which is the nec- essary result of the revolution in the instruments of production, is effected by a medley of transition forms. As the person who makes a sale, he is a seller; as the person who makes a purchase, he is a buyer. Eden in his "The State of the Poor, an History of the Labouring Classes in England," says, "the natural produce of our soil is certainly not fully adequate to our subsistence; we can neither be clothed, lodged nor fed but in consequence of some previous labour. They have risen by means as vile as those by which the Roman freedman once on a time made himself the master of his patronus. So soon, now, as the commodity has been changed into money, the money becomes its transient equivalent-form, the use-value of which equivalent-form is to be found in the bodies of other commodities. 147,284 . lxxi. m. If, with the mass of the popu- lation, that of the means of production employed in agri- culture also diminished, the mass of the capital employed in agriculture increased, because a part of the means of production that were formerly scattered, was concentrated and turned into capital. 674.) TIME-WAGES 549 man does the work of 1% or 2 men, the supply of labour increases, although the supply of labour-power on the market remains constant. Econ. c, pp. . The country labourer and his family who had often, in a way truly wonderful, preserved, under the foulest conditions, a thoroughness and purity of character, go, in these, utterly to the devil. 414 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION following contemporary statement by Leonard Horner, the fac- tory inspector, their ever watchful censor. The population can therefore barely maintain its numbers." Thus in Cardiganshire: 1851. The working-time here includes, be- sides the 24 hours of the 6 working-days, a great part also of the 24 hours of Sunday. value... All combined labour on a large scale requires, more or less, a directing authority, in order to secure the harmonious working of the individual activities, and to perform the general functions CO-OPERATION 331 that have their origin in the action of the combined organism, as distinguished from the action of its separate organs. c, p 35. II., p. "The Eco- nomic Position of the British Labourer." London, 1865, p. c, p. The first step made by an object of util- ity towards acquiring exchange-value is when it forms a non-use- value for its owner, and that happens when it forms a superfluous portion of some article required for his immediate wants. The mediaeval peasant produced quit-rent-corn for his feudal lord and tithe-corn for his parson. A Manchester manufacturer states: "We formerly had 75 carding engines, now we have 12, doing the same quantity of work. As a producer of the activity of 1 The molecular theory of modern chemistry first scientifically worked out by Laurent and Gerhardt rests on no other law. * The one-sidedness and the deficiencies of the detail labourer become perfections when he is a part of the collective labourer. For the price of land in London is always very high in comparison with its yearly revenue, and therefore every buyer speculates on getting rid of it again at a jury price (the expropriation valuation fixed by jurymen), or on pocketing an extraordinary increase of value arising from the neighbourhood of some large establishment. How Modern Industry, when it has attained to a certain pitch, is capable, by the revolution it effects in the mode of production and in the social conditions of production, of also revolutionising people's minds, is strikingly shown by a comparison of Senior's speech in 1863, with his philippic against the Factory Act of 1833; or by a comparison, of the views of the congress above referred to, with the fact that in certain country dis- tricts of England poor parents are forbidden, on pain of death by starvation, to educate their children. It must be remem- bered that privation of food is very reluctantly borne, and that as a rule great poorness of diet will only come when other privations have preceded it. 70-71). * In consequence of the separation of the social branches of production, commodi- ties are better made, the various bents and talents of men select a suitable field, 2 and without some restraint no important results can be obtained anywhere. Although the unemployed thousands of the East-end did not parade with their black flags en masse, the human torrent was imposing enough. In a great many of the factories, the old brutalities soon blossomed out again un- punished. The capitalist does not know that the normal price of labour also includes a definite quantity of unpaid labour, and that this very unpaid labour is the normal source of his gain. We are reminded of ancint Rome. My experience, which is considerable, in treating the diseases of stove workers, compels me to express the opinion that their sanitary condition is by no means so high as that of the operatives in a spinning factory (and Capital, in its memorials to Parliament, had painted them as floridly healthy, after the manner of Rubens). c, p. You gain just as much as you lose. It came into effect on September lbth, 1844. And whatever farm- work is done by his wife and children, is done at the same disad- vantage. g94 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION Trent. The whole of his book is a vindication of a working-day of unrestricted length; that Parliament should forbid children of 13 years to be exhausted by working 12 hours a day, reminds his liberal soul of the darkest days of the middle ages. They are liable to be urged, at times by the parish officers, at times by employers, under threats of being themselves discharged, to be taken to work at an age when ... In tailoring, as well as in weaving, human labour-power is expended. Under these circum- stances, therefore, no change can take place in the absolute mag- nitude, either of the surplus- value, or of the value of labour-power, CHANGES OF MAGNITUDE 521 without a simultaneous change in their relative magnitudes, i.e., relatively to each other. of Insp. In order that gold may be held as money, and made to form a hoard, it must be prevented from circulating, or from trans- forming itself into a means of enjoyment. "Such a spirit of 136 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION debtors, who lost their political power together with the economic basis on which it was established. 518 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION the difference (?) to his employer and receiving it back with in- terest, &C." 1 In reality, the labourer advances his labour gratui- tously to the capitalist during, say one week, in order to receive the market-price at the end of the week, &c, and it is this which, according to Mill, transforms him into a capitalist. In one, the col- lective labourer, or social body of labour, appears as the domin- ant subject, and the mechanical automaton as the object; in the other, the automaton itself is the subject, and the workmen are merely conscious organs, co-ordinate with the unconscious organs of the automaton, and together with them, subordinated to the central moving-power. In the same way the manifold concrete useful kinds of labour, embodied in these different commodities, rank now as so many different forms of the realisation, or manifestation, of undifferentiated human labour. had remained the legal "day," within the limits of which at first the 12, and later the 10 hours' labour of young persons and women had to be performed under the prescribed conditions. 36.) 1 [Added in the 4th German edition.— The law of progressive diminu- tion of the relative magnitude of variable capital and its effect on the condi- tion of the class of wage-workers is conjectured rather than understood by some of the prominent economists of the classical school. per hour, and £4 10s. It will be remembered that manufacture, properly so called, conquers but partially the domain of national production, and always rests on the handicrafts of the town and the domestic industry of the rural districts as its ultimate basis. 274.) THE GENERAL FORMULA FOR CAPITAL 149 place, so soon as the purchased commodity is resold, in other words, so soon as the circuit M— G— M is completed. 234, 241, 251, 254, 274, 275, 554, 276, 293.) "But do you think it would be possible for Government to maintain such an army of inspectors as would be necessary to do all that you want them to do, without information from the men?" "No, I should think it would be next to impossible." . This is, however, only the legally prescribed corvee. 65.) The most infallible means for reducing this quali- tative difference between the English and Continental working-hour would be a law shortening quantitatively the length of the working-day in Continental factories. What every mechanical workman has now to do, and what every boy can do, is not to work himself but to superintend the beautiful labour of the machine. For years the over-crowd- ing of rural labourers' dwellings has been a matter of deep con- cern, not only to persons who care for sanitary good, but to per^ sons who care for decent and moral life. An increase in the quantity of use-values is an increase of material wealth. And even if it were so, a machine working 16 hours daily for 7y years, covers as long a working period as, and transmits to the total product no more value than, the same machine would if it worked only 8 hours daily for 15 years. Really hard work during 12 or 14 hours of the day, or for any longer time, is too much for any human being." 2 In the workshops under the Factory Acts, piece-wage be- comes the general rule, because capital can there only increase the efficacy of the working-day by intensifying labour. In so far as actual pay- ments have to be made, money does not serve as a circulating medium, as a mere transient agent in the interchange of products, but as the individual incarnation of social labour, as the inde- pendent form of existence of exchange-value, as the universal com- modity. Despite the doubled productiveness of labour, the day's labour creates, as before, a new value of six shillings and no more, which, however, is now spread over twice as many articles. They are spinners and weavers; they make soap and candles, as well as, in many cases, shoes and clothes for their own use. 2 "Toutes les productions d'un meme genre ne forment proprement qu'une masse, dont le prix se determine en general et sans egard aux circon- stances particulieres." (Le Trosne, 1. The rules of the guilds, as I have said before, by limiting most strictly the number of apprentices and journeymen that a single master could employ, prevented him from becoming a capitalist. The value of labour-power resolves itself into the value of a definite quantity of the means of subsistence. Here, by comparison of the statistics of the individual provinces, and of the individual counties in each province, he proves that the misery there is not, as Malthus would have it, in proportion to the number of the popula- tion, but in inverse ratio to this. On the other hand, the value of the labour-power cannot rise from three shillings to four, without a decrease in the productiveness of labour, whereby eight hours become requisite to produce the same quantity of necessaries, for the production of which six hours previously sufficed. The repetition or renewal of the act of selling in order to buy, is kept within bounds by the very object it aims at, namely, consumption or the satisfaction of definite wants, an aim that lies altogether outside the sphere of circulation. Price, like relative value in general, expresses the value of a commodity {e.g., a ton of iron), by stating that a given quan- tity of the equivalent {e.g., an ounce of gold), is directly exchange^ MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OF COMMODITIES 103 able for iron. Therefore, the value of labour-power, and the value which that la- bour-power creates in the labour-process, are two entirely differ- ent magnitudes; and this difference of the two values was what the capitalist had in view, when he was purchasing the labour-power. of cotton into 1-|- lbs. It was now a question of production of surplus-labour itself. IV. Exploitation of the workman by the machine is therefore, with him, identical with exploitation of the machine by the workman. 2 According to this, a plough drawn by oxen, which is a contrivance common to the most dif- ferent epochs, would be a machine, while Claussen's circular loom, which, worked by a single labourer, weaves 96,000 picks per minute, would be a mere tool. 296.) 3 In an American compendium that has gone through, perhaps, 20 edi- tions, this passage occurs: "It matters not in what form capital re-ap- pears;" then after a lengthy enumeration of all the possible ingredients of production whose value re-appears in the product, the passage concludes thus: "The various kinds of food, clothing, and shelter, necessary for the existence and comfort of the human being, are also changed. The rapid rise of the Flemish wool manufactures, and the corresponding rise in the price of wool in England, gave the direct impulse to these evic- tions. How comes it, however, that a great num- ber, we might say, a great majority, of labourers, live in a more economical way? Partie, p. per week. The Equivalent form of value We have seen that commodity A (the linen), by expressing its value in the use-value of a commodity differing in kind (the coat), at the same time impresses upon the latter a specific form of value, namely that of the equivalent. (1.) A shortening of the working-day under the conditions given above, leaves the value of labour-power, and with it, the necessary labour-time, unaltered. The first word of this adaptation is the creation of a relative surplus-popu- lation, or industrial reserve army. The working-day for all artificers and field labourers from March to September ought, according to this statute (which, however, could not be enforced), to last from 5 in the morning to between 7 and 8 in the evening. From the Statute Book it passed into Political Economy, and was handed down by Culpeper, J. of Fact., 31st. Engels in his "Lage der Arbeitenden Klasse Englands," and other writers, that I need only mention the subject in this place. Not only does the scale of reproduction materially extend, but the production of surplus-value increases more rapidly than the value of the additional capital. Early marriage and the operation of the various laws of settlement affect the one as enlistment and the Mutiny Act affect the other." (Dr. Hunter, 1. By our assumption, the coat is worth twice as much as the linen. But as soon as this diminu- tion touches the point at which the surplus-labour that nourishes capital is no longer supplied in normal quantity, a reaction sets in: a smaller part of revenue is capitalised, accumulation lags, and the movement of rise in wages receives a check. . . The opinion that prices are determined by the quantity of the circulating medium, was also held by Barbon and other much earlier writers. . The fact which here stares us in the face is, that a commodity and gold, 20 yards of linen and £2, have changed hands and places, in other words, that they have been exchanged. Dunning, 1. 24.) * Malthus, 1. If this diminution be not compensated by an increase from some other quarter, the market price of the commodi- ties falls. For that (power) 1 In 1865 this law was improved to some extent. Value, therefore, being the active factor in such a process, and assuming at one time the form of money, at another that of commodities, but through all these changes preserving itself and expanding, it requires some independent form, by means of which its identity may at any time be established. Nevertheless, the attempt was made to enrich the Indian treasury by the price at which the necessaries of life were sold to the starving people. Their experience shows that even if the height of wages corresponds more or less with the average intensity of labour, the relative price of labour varies generally in the inverse direction. When the English govern- ment succeeded in suppressing the intestine wars of these "great men," and their constant incursions into the Lowland plains, the chiefs of the clans by no means gave up their time-honoured trade as robbers; they only changed its form. We have already seen, that the sphere of circulation has an opening through which gold (or the material of money generally) enters into it as a commodity with a given value. xviii., n. And as the labourers make men rich, so the more labourers there will be, the more rich men ... The colossal effects of simple co-operation are to be seen in the gigantic structures of the ancient Asiatics, Egyptians, Etrus- cans, &c. Other- wise, he would not bring it to the market. The history of this struggle shows two opposed tendencies. To resume, then: In the use-value of each commodity there is contained useful labour, i.e., productive activity of a definite kind and exercised with a definite aim. /. The labouring population therefore produces, along with the accumulation of capital produced by it, the means by which itself is made relatively superfluous, is turned into a relative sur- plus-population; and it does this to an always increasing extent. "In these spacious halls the benignant power of steam summons around him his myriads of willing menials." 1 Along with the tool, the skill of the workman in handling it passes over to the machine. c, p. 374 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION of the machine, which is the product of machinery. Instead of the protec- tion against French importation, the absence of protection to English fac- tory children now serves their turn. and find accommodation for two or three lodgers . a fortnight at the very lowest.'" 1 Such are Irish wages, such is Irish life! In fact the misery of Ireland is again the topic of the day in England. Coal- mining: 1851, 183,389: 1861, 246,613. . But if the 12 men are employed in six pairs, by as many different small masters, it will be quite a matter of chance, whether each of these masters produces the same value, and consequently whether he realises the general rate of surplus-value. This, however, is the delusion as well COMMODITIES 61 of the mercantilists and their recent revivers, Ferrier, Ganilh, l and others, as also of their antipodes, the modern bagmen of Free-trade, such as Bastiat. The atmosphere of these cabins, combined with the other priva- tions they are subjected to, has made this class particularly sus- ceptible to low fever and pulmonary consumption." 1 After this, it is no wonder that, according to the unanimous testimony of the inspectors, a sombre discontent runs through the ranks of this class, that they long for the return of the past, loathe the present, despair of the future, give themselves up "to the evil influence of agitators," and have only one fixed idea, to emigrate to America. After thus proving clearly, that even if capitalist production had no existence, still it would always exist, Mill is consistent enough to show, on the contrary, that it has no existence, even when it does exist. Already dis- counted in the regular factory districts by the cotton famine, which threw much capital from its wonted sphere into the great centres of the money-market, the crisis assumed, at this time, an especially financial character. 10.) "The price of the necessaries of life is, in fact, the cost of producing labour." (Malthus, "Inquiry into, &c, Rent," London, 1815, p. 3 1 "It is certainly much to be regretted that any class of persons should toil 12 hours a day, which, including the time for their meals and for going to and returning from their work, amounts, in fact, to 14 of the 24 hours.... To become a commodity a product must be transferred to another, whom it will serve as a use-value, by means of an exchange.) 1 Lastly nothing can have value, without being an object of utility. The work of directing, superintending, and adjusting, becomes one of the functions of capital, from the moment that the labour under the control of capital, becomes co-operative. Whence this di (Terence in their values? The essential division is, into workmen who are actually employed on the machines (among whom are included a few who look after the engine), and into mere attendants (almost exclusively children) of these workmen. Mr. Potter talks of the trade reviving 'in one, two, or three years,' and he asks us not 'to encourage or allow (!) the work- SIMPLE REPRODUCTION 577 ing power to emigrate.' He says that it is very natural the workers should wish to emigrate; but he thinks that in spite of their de- sire, the nation ought to keep this half million of workers with their 700,000 dependents, shut up in the cotton districts; and as a necessary consequence, he must of course think that the nation ought to keep down their discontent by force, and sustain them by alms — and upon the chance that the cotton masters may some day want them. 19, 20. But it did not regulate in any way the 6— hours' work of the children whose work-time began at 12 mid- day or later. Aft- er Manufacture has once separated, made independent, and isolat- ed the various operations, the labourers are divided, classified, and grouped according to their predominating qualities. They declared that they would willingly pay for better dwellings if they were to be had. In the former case, it is a ques- tion of How and What, in the latter of How much? In the course of our investi- gation we shall find, in general, that the characters who appear on the economic stage are but the personifications of the economic relations that exist between them. 1 When the production of commodities has sufficiently ex- tended itself, money begins to serve as the means of payment beyond the sphere of the circulation of commodities. And his money he cannot eat. Apres moi le deluge! is the watchword of every capitalist and of every capitalist nation. The fact that the means of produc- tion, and the productiveness of labour, increase more rapidly than the productive population, expresses itself, therefore, capitalistically in the inverse form that the labouring population always increases more rapidly than the conditions under which capital can employ this increase for its own self-expan- sion. He declares, therefore, that Ireland is still over-populated, and the stream of emigration still flows too lazily. Supported by his own legal decision, he introduced the system at once into his own factory. Hence a child, until he is grown up, costs his parents not more, on the whole, than twenty drachmas. Hence, machinery squeezes itself into the manufacturing industries first for one detail process, then for another. They are thenceforth an industrial perpetuum mobile, that would go on producing forever, did it not meet with certain natural obstructions in the weak bodies and the strong wills of its human attendants. a "Reports of Insp. Econ., particularly relating to value and to demand and supply." Lond., 1821, p. 1 Circulation sweats money from every pore. Farmers' Profits Schedule D. But who, in 1860, the Zenith year of the Eng- lish cotton industry, would have dreamt of the galloping im- provements in machinery, and the corresponding displacement of working people, called into being during the following 3 years, under the stimulus of the American Civil War? ch.V.) On the one hand, Adam Smith here (but not everywhere) confuses the determi- nation of value by means of the quantity of labour expended in the produc- tion of commodities, with the determination of the values of commodities by means of the value of labour, and seeks in consequence to prove that equal quantities of labour have always the same value On the other hand, he has a presentiment, that labour, so far as it manifests itself in the value of com- modities, counts only as expenditure of labour-power, but he treats this ex- penditure as the mere sacrifice of rest, freedom, and happiness, not as at the COMMODITIES 47 SECTION 3.— THE FORM OF VALUE OR EXCHANGE- VALUE Commodities come into the world in the shape of use-values, articles, or goods, such as iron, linen, corn, &c. The system of protection was an artificial means of manufac- turing manufacturers, of expropriating independent labourers, of GENESIS OP THE INDUSTRIAL CAPITALIST 757 capitalising the national means of production and subsistence, of forcibly abbreviating the transition from the mediaeval to the modern mode of production. 632 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION This is a law of population peculiar to the capitalist mode of production; and in fact every special historic mode of production has its own special laws of population, historically valid within its limits alone. c, p. So, too, the economic categories, already discussed by us, bear the stamp of history. La richesse, comme le travail, et par le travail, donne un fruit annuel qui peut etre detruit chaque annee sans que le riche en devienne plus pauvre. 1 It is, in the first place, quite clear that a change in the value of gold does not, in any way, affect its function as a standard of price. In Manufacture it is the workmen who, with their manual implements, must, either singly or in groups, carry on each particular detail process. 1865.-29,920,623 lbs. DIVISION OF LABOUR AND MANUFACTURE 349 with another during the progress of production, lay claim to him in various ways. Although manufacture creates, as we have already seen, a simple separation of the labourers into skilled and unskilled, simultaneously with their hierarchic arrangement in classes, yet the number of the unskilled labourers, owing to the preponderating influence of the skilled, remains very limited. In cloths of other descriptions, as much as 50 per cent, size is sometimes added; so that a manufacturer may, and does truly boast, that he is getting rich by selling cloth for less money per pound than he paid for the mere yarn of which they are composed." 2 But the workpeople had to suffer, not only from the experiments of the manufacturers inside the mills, and of the municipalities outside, not only from reduced wages and absence of work, from want and from charity, and from the eulogistic speeches of lords and commons. Comm. The value of the linen can therefore be expressed only relatively — i.e., in some other com- modity. The so-called currency school con- cludes from this that with high prices too little, with low prices too much money is in circulation. Barbon, 1. 9.) "This system PIECE-WAGES 555 the day's or week's wage will vary with the individual differences of the labourers, of whom one supplies in a given time the mini- mum of product only, another the average, a third more than the average. Cazenove, p. The soil (and this, economically speaking, includes water) in the virgin state in which it supplies 1 man with necessaries or the means of subsistence ready to hand, exists independently of him, and is the universal subject of human labour. The public— e.g., at the Dub- lin meeting in May, 1860 — took their part with Irish warmth. If, on the one hand, the individual labourers are appropriated and annexed for life by a limited function; on the other hand, the various operations of the hierarchy are parcelled out among the labourers according to both their natural and their acquired capa- 1 "The master manufacturer, by dividing the work to be executed into different processes, each requiring different degrees of skill or of force, can purchase exactly that precise quantity of both which is necessary for each process; whereas, if the whole work were executed by one workman, that person must possess sufficient skill to perform the most difficult, and suffi- cient strength to execute the most laborious of the operations into which the article is divided." (Ch. Babbage, 1. Ixxi. 2 1. It is plain, however, that these changes of value are independent of the increment or surplus-value added to the value of the cot- ton by the spinning itself. of Insp. On the other hand, the fetters that this same principle laid on the dominion of capital, fall away. Besides, the new landed aristocracy was the natural ally of the new bankocracy, of the newly-hatched haute finance, and of the large manufacturers, then depending on protective duties. Its author is William Stafford. 3. Ed.. It is also a perfectly correct method: being in fact the first method given above with this difference, that instead of being applied to space, in which the different parts of the completed product lie side by side, it deals with time, in which those parts are successively produced. The master prosecutes again, the court condemns again, although one of the judges, Mr. Shee, publicly denounces this as a le- gal monstrosity, by which a man can periodically, as long as he lives, be punished over and over again for the same offence or crime. Labour-time, as a measure of value, is not, however, affected in this case, except in so far as the duration of labour, and the degree of its intensity, are two antithetical and mutually exclusive expressions for one and the same quantity of labour. c. surplus-value. In relation to the discharged workmen, the £1,500 worth of means of subsistence never was capital. These conditions affect surplus-labour only as natural limits, i.e., by fixing the points at which labour for others can begin. this soup may be provided at — d., the portion of 20 ounces." 2 With the advance of capitalistic production, the adulteration of food rendered Thompson's ideal su- perfluous. The result of about a year's working was that "the same amount of product for the same cost was received, and the workpeople as a whole earned in eleven hours as much wages as they did before in twelve." 3 1 pass over the experiments made in the spinning and carding rooms, because they were accompanied by an increase of 2% in the speed of the machines. Since the division of the day's work into necessary and surplus- labour differs in different countries, and even in the same country at different periods, or in different branches -of industry; and 1 See Paper read by Dr. Watson, Reporter on Products to the Govern- ment of India, before the Society of Arts, 17th April, 1860. From this alone it is apparent that the labour expended on the production of gold is rather increasing while that expended on silver production has decidedly decreased, which quite natu- rally explains the drop in the value of the latter. 66, n. The relations between them cease on the day when the term stipulated in the contract they concluded ex- pires. Whilst on one side of the wall, the land calls for labour, on the other side the defrauded labourers are casting at it longing glances. Hitherto there is no such book. Let us, therefore, assume an exchange of non- equivalents. 6d. If what is paid as wages is included, as it commonly is, in the term capital, it is ab- surd to talk of labour separately from capital, The word capital as thus em- ployed includes labour and capital both." (James Mill: "Elements of Pol. Owing to this, the value of a part of the constant capital falls, and in proportion to the magnitude of the fall, the total value of the commodity also falls. Author, the Rev. 543 CHAPTER XX TIME-WAGES Wages themselves again take many forms, a fact not recog* nisable in the ordinary economic treatises which, exclusively interested in the material side of the question, neglect every dif- ference of form. "His (the farm labour- er's) keep is reckoned at about five pence a day, but in many districts it was THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 681 'To the insufficient quantity and miserable quality of the house accommodation generally had," says Dr. Simon, in his official Health Report, "by our agricultural labourers, almost every page of Dr. Hunter's report bears testimony. In his nor- mal state of health, strength, and activity, and with the average degree of skill that he may possess, he must always give up the same portion of his rest, his freedom, and his happiness." ("Wealth of Nations," b. Although, therefore, it is clear at the first glance that, by incorporating both stupendous physical forces, and the natural sciences, with the process of production, Modern Industry raises the productiveness of labour to an extraor- dinary degree, it is by no means equally clear, that this increased productive force is not, on the other hand, purchased by an increased expenditure of labour. So far as accumulation takes place, the capitalist must have succeeded in selling his commodities, and in reconverting the sale- money into capital. Greek society was founded upon slavery, and had, therefore, for its natural basis, the inequality of men and of their labour-powers. . Coining, like 1 "The prices of things will certainly rise in every nation, as the gold and silver increase amongst the people; and consequently, where the gold and silver decrease in any nation, the prices of all things must fall propor- tionately to such decrease of money." (Jacob Vanderlint: "Money Answers all Things." Lond, 1734, p. But for what is the commodity exchanged? This ma- jority forms an element of the floating surplus-population, growing with the extension of those branches of industry. m. To know what is useful for a dog, one must study dog-nature. 149: "He (Adam Smith) passes over without remark the question as to the quantity of coin in circulation, and treats money quite wrongly as a mere commodity." This statement applies only in so far as Adam Smith, ex offi- cio, treats of money. Most of the accidents from them happen to little children, from their creeping under the 422 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION to its extreme simplicity, it allows of a rapid and constant change of the individuals burdened with this drudgery. That of the better situated handicraftsmen, with whom the machine competes, sinks. of Fact, for 31st Dec, 1841.") 2 See "Judgment of Mr. J. 1 The cry of the people and the legislation directed, for 150 years after Henry VII., against the expropriation of the small farmers and peasants, were alike fruitless. During this trans- formation period, legislation also strove to retain the 4 acres of land by the cottage of the agricultural wage-labourer, and forbad him to take lodgers into his cottage. At a given stage in its development, the narrow technical basis on which manufacture rested, came into conflict with requirements of production that were created by manufacture itself. 1. Suppose the circulation of the 4 articles takes a day. The money, therefore, is not spent, it is merely advanced. But, in that case, its expression in an infinite series is ever incomplete and deficient in unity. The degree of culture of these "labour-powers" must naturally be such as appears in the following dialogues with one of the com- missioners: Jeremiah Haynes, age 12 — "Four times four is 8; 4 fours are 16. 2 This is what took place in the Roumanian provinces. 42. 337,355 334,212 3,143 Turnips, . Do we really know any more about "usury," when we say it contradicts "justice eternelle," "equite eternelle," "mutuality eternelle," and other "verites eternelles" than the fa- thers of the church did when they said it was incompatible with "grace eter- nelle," "foi eternelle," and "la volonte eternelle de Dieu"? This we learn from a remark- able statute which runs thus: 'That all vagrants shall be branded, &c.'" 1. value of yarn=24s. 10.) 1 In The Times of 26th November, 1862, a manufacturer, whose mill employed 800 hands, and consumed, on the average, 150 bales of East Indian, or 130 bales of American cotton, complains, in doleful manner, of the stand- ing expenses of his factory when not working. Many of them will execute as much work in four days as a Frenchman will in five or six. We have a King (told it is a Queen), they call her the Princess Alexandra. Its production consequently pre-supposes his existence. It lies deeper. Variable capital preponderated greatly over constant. But an act of Parliament of the same date (an act to amend the criminal law relating to violence, threats, and molestation), re-established, in point of fact, the former state of things in a new shape. White, the certifying surgeon for factories at Downpat- rick, states in his official report, dated the 15th December, 1865: "The serious accidents at the scutching mills are of the most fear- ful nature. a week. A very good portrait of this Edmund Burke, during his liberal time, is to be found in the writings of the Rev. There are landlords who deem any stye good enough for their labourer and his family, and who yet do not disdain to drive with him the hardest possible bar- gain for rent. An adequate form of manifestation of value, a fit embodiment of abstract, undifferentiated, and therefore equal human labour, that material alone can be whose every sample exhibits the same uniform qualities. 6d. . But just as, upon every such transmutation of a commodity, its two forms, commodity-form and money-form, exist simulta- neously but at opposite poles, so every seller has a buyer opposed to him, and every buyer a seller. Young, in his "Political Arithmetic," Lond. On the other hand, no change in this productiveness affects the labour represented by value. In the production of value a number of workmen rank merely as so many individual workmen; and it therefore makes no differ- ence in the value produced whether the 1,200 men work separately, or united under the control of one capitalist. unless he expects to acquire additional value, &c." (Scrope, "Polit. This is at the rate of 9s. 3 or ., , —3- can therefore never Working-day Value created 100 100-f-x reach the limit of 77^, still less rise to ,ZL . Insp. The expansion by fits and starts of the scale of production is the preliminary to its equally sudden contraction; the latter again evokes the former, but the former is impossible without dispos- able human material, without an increase in the number of la- bourers independently of the absolute growth of the population. Ducpetiaux, inspector- general of Belgian prisons and charitable institutions, and mem- ber of the central commission of Belgian statistics. They are indeed kept in misery." ("Reasons for the Late Increase of the Poor Rates: or a Com- parative View of the Prices of Labour and Provisions." London, 1777, p. of Fact, for 30th June, 1857," p. It is not before the day fixed for payment that the means of pay- ment actually steps into circulation, leaves the hand of the buyer for that of the seller. Legisla- tion was, therefore, compelled to gradually get rid of its ex- ceptional character, or where, as in England, it proceeds after the manner of the Roman Casuists, to declare any house in which work was done to be a factory. 1 The confidence that trusts in this appearance ought to receive a first severe shock from the fact that both forms of wages exist side by side, simultaneously, in the same branches of industry; e.g., "the compositors of London, as a general rule, work by the piece, time-work being the exception, while those in the country work by the day, the exception being work by the piece. is used to flavour a largo quantity of broth or gruel, of meal and leeks, and day after day this is the labourer's dinner." The advance of industry resulted for him, in this harsh and damp climate, in "the abandonment of the solid homespun clothing in favour of the cheap and so-called cotton goods," and of stronger drinks for so-called tea. The comparison of the greed for surplus-labour in the Da- nubian Principalities with the same greed in English factories has a special interest, because surplus-labour in the corvee has an independent and palpable form. Children of too tender an age are sent adrift. 4.) 2 "L'oro e l'argento hanno valore come metalli anteriore all'esser mo- neta." (Galiani, 1. It is true, he has in hand a capital whose amount has not changed, and of which a part, viz., the buildings, machinery, &c, were already there when the work of his business began. In the expression of value of the linen, the utility of the tailoring consists, not in making clothes, but in making an object, which we at once recognise to be Value, and therefore to be a congelation of labour, but of labour indistin- guishable from that realised in the value of the linen. 1 Professor Cairnes, after stating that the superintendence of labour is a leading feature of production by slaves in the Southern States of North America, continues: "The peasant proprietor (of the North), appropriating the whole produce of his toil, needs no other stimulus to exertion. Therefore in order that our in- vestigation may lead to accurate results, we must make abstrac- tion from that portion of the value of the product, in which con- stant capital alone appears, and consequently must equate the constant capital to zero or make c=0. The 6th section of the Act provided: "That there shall be allowed in the course of every day not less than one and a half hours for meals to every such person restricted as hereinbefore provided." The employment of children under 9, with exceptions mentioned later, was forbidden; the work of children between 9 and 13 was limited to 8 hours a day, night-work, i.e., according to this Act, work between 8.30 p. Capital works on both sides at the same time. G. 1. In Lancashire the number of mills increased only 4 per cent, between 1839 and 1850; 19 per cent, between 1850 and 1856; and 33 per cent, between 1856 and 1862; while the persons employed in them during each of the above periods of 11 years increased absolutely, but diminished relatively. 161). In those great manufactures, (!) on the contrary, which are destined to supply the great wants of the great body of the people, every different branch of the work employs so great a number of work- men, that it is impossible to collect them all into the same workhouse... A more exhaustive study of Asiatic, and especially of Indian forms of common property, would show how from the different forms of primitive common property, different forms of its dissolution have been developed. No doubt the answer is already anticipated in the price of the article, in the exponent of the magnitude of its value. It can therefore be replaced by paper symbols. The second step to which it drives, is to exclude also from the selling price of the commodity, at least a part of the abnormal surplus-value created by the extension of the working- day. Among the defenders of the working-classes the foremost are: Jacob Vanderlint, in: "Money Answers all Things." London, 1734; the Rev. This form exists first as the price of the commodity offered for sale, then as an actual sum of money, which, however, was already expressed in the price, and lastly, as the price of an equivalent commodity. British soldiers enforced this eviction, and came to blows with the inhabitants. 170), or as Quesnay in his "Maximes generates" puts it, "Vendre est acheter." MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OP COMMODITIES 109 alienating that of their own labour. There, then, people- go into the forests, and cut bread for themselves, just as with us they cut fire-wood." 2 Suppose now such an eastern bread-cutter- requires 12 working-hours a week for the satisfaction of all his wants. 3 With the changing productiveness of labour the same quan- tum of product represents a varying working-time. f p. The blacksmith forges and the product is a forging. 1 In manufacture, as well as in simple co-operation, the collec- tive working organism is a form of existence of capital. The price or money-form of commodities is, like their form of value generally, a form quite distinct from their palpable bodily form; it is, therefore, a purely ideal or mental form. That is against our contract and the law of exchanges. The general form of relative value, embracing the whole world of commodities, converts the single commodity that is excluded from the rest, and made to play the part of equivalent — here the linen— into the universal equivalent. Although the length of a c is given, b c appears to be capable of prolongation, if not by extension beyond its end c, which is also the end of the working-day a c, yet, at all events, by pushing back its starting-point b in the direction of a. everything, in short, which cannot be done unless a great many pairs of hands help each other in the same undivided employment and at the same time" (E. . 34.) "To permit, which is tantamount to compelling... 2 "Ch. Empl. 1 See Karl Marx: "Zur Kritik, &c." "Theorien von der Masseinheit des Geldes," p. p- 27. c, Fourth Report (1865), 58, p. 62 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION We perceive, at first sight, the deficiencies of the elementary form of value: it is a mere germ, which must undergo a series of metamorphoses before it can ripen into the price-form. Laing: "National Distress," &c, London, 1844.) "The great class who have nothing to give for food but ordinary labour, are the great bulk of the people." (James Mill, in art.: "Colony," Supplement to the Encyclop. The price in that case is imaginary, like certain quantities in mathe- matics. The effect would be the same as if an alteration had taken place in the function of gold as a standard of prices. If the labourer is row employed less than 12 hours (or less than 6 days in the week), e.g., only 6 or 8 hours, he receives, with this price of labour, only 2s. An increase in the wages of labour does not necessarily imply an enhancement of the price of labour. If one workman required considerably more time for the production of a commodity than is socially necessary, the duration of the necessary labour-time would, in his case, sen- sibly deviate from the labour-time socially necessary on an aver- age; and consequently his labour would not count as average la- bour, nor his labour-power as average labour-power. . 231, note.) 3 "II a fallu convenir (a new edition of the contrat social!) que toutes les fois qu'il echangerait du travail fait contre du travail a faire, le dernier (le capitaliste) aurait une valeur superieure au premier" (le travailleur). our manufactures, and everything else, will soon become so moderate as to turn the balance of trade in our favour, and thereby fetch the money back again." (1. . As this point is the pivot on which a clear comprehension of Political Economy turns, we must go more into detail. The spindle and cotton, in- stead of resting quietly side by side, join together in the process, their forms are altered, and they are turned into yarn; but their value is no more affected by this fact than it would be if they had been simply exchanged for their equivalent in yarn. . Thiers: De la propriete. it seems quite incom- prehensible that man can have fallen under the domination of capital, his own product; can be subordinated to it; and as in reality this is beyond dis- pute the case, involuntarily the question arises; How has the labourer been able to pass from being master of capital— as its creator — to being its slave?" (Von Thunen, "Der tsolierte Staat " Part ii., Section ii., Rostock, 1863, pp. where the consumption of a commodity is a part of the process of production. I, p. He advances one part of the agricultural stock, the landlord the other. Everywhere the increased scale of industrial establishments is the starting-point for a more comprehensive organisation of the collective work of many, for a wider development of their material motive forces — in other words, for the progressive transformation of isolated processes of production, carried on by customary methods, into processes of production socially combined and scientifically ar- ranged. Take away the cream of the workers, and fixed capital will depreciate in a great degree, and the floating will not subject itself to a struggle with the short supply of inferior labour.... c, p. R. Since the whole of this value is contained in the 20 lbs. ... It is the very contrary in the circuit M — G — M. How, then, is the magnitude of this value to be measured? Saxony, Switzerland, "This comparison," says Mr. Redgrave, "is yet more unfa- vourable to Great Britain, inasmuch as there is so large a number of factories in which weaving by power is carried on in conjunction with spinning [whilst in the table the weavers are not deducted] , and the factories abroad are chiefly spinning factories; if it were possible to compare like with like, strictly, I could find many cot- ton spinning factories in my district in which mules containing 2,200 spindles are minded by one man (the "minder") and two as- sistants only, turning off daily 220 lbs. The same holds 1 "The price of labour is the sum paid for a given quantity of labour." (Sir Edward West, "Price of Corn and Wages of Labour." London, 1826, p. Bright proposed to lower the rate of pay from l%d. extensively in operation since the introduction of the combing-machine, especially Lister's ... [called the rich] and themselves." (Edmund Burke, 1. In a work, which, ex professo, treats of "trade" and "speculation," occurs the following: "All trade consists in the exchange of things of different kinds; and the advantage" (to the mer- chant?) "arises out of this difference. 262-263). Some of the capital that was previously de- voted to production of necessary means of subsistence, has to be- come reproduced in another form. 73.) ABSOLUTE AND RELATIVE SURPLUS-VALUE 5l3 ible how little trouble and expense the bringing up of their children causes them. Unfor- tunately, due to insufficient inspection personnel, the English code is still largely a dead letter with regard to its application to workshops. On the earlier infamies of the factory sys- tem, cf. The worst categories were the needle- women, silk-weavers and kid-glovers. 1 1. It is dangerous, because it makes them independent." ("Children's Empl. The tool or working machine is that part of the machinery with which the industrial revolution of the 18th century started. He must produce surplus-value. of Insp. 2 Let us now return to our illustration. (12.) Worcestershire House-destruction here not quite so excessive; yet from 1851 to 1 '31, the number of inhabitants to each house on the average, has risen from 4.2 to 4.6. Badsey. — F E.\ MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OF COMMODITIES 145 The current of the stream of gold and silver is a double one. 3 This is the more absurd as the value of a com- modity is determined not by the quantity of labour actually real- ised in it, but by the quantity of living labour necessary for its production. It creates new conditions for the lordship of capital over labour. One need only glance superficially at the statistics of Eng- lish pauperism to find that the quantity of paupers increases with every crisis, and diminishes with every revival of trade. . of Fact., 31 Oct., 1865," p. Econ." Lond., 1821, p. On the other hand they speak of the market- prices of labour, i.e., prices oscillating above or below its natural price. 2 1 "Since the general introduction of machinery, human nature has been forced far beyond its average strength. . Unless it takes the form of some com- modity, it does not become capital. Brodie, Sir G. 5.) Although Corbet does not see that M — M, the exchange of money for money, is the characteristic form of cir- culation, not only of merchants' capital but of all capital, yet at least he acknowledges that this form is common to gambling and to one species of trade, viz., speculation: but then comes MacCulloch and makes out, that to buy in order to sell, is to speculate, and thus the difference between Specu- lation and Trade vanishes. According to the census of 1861 for England and Wales, we find in the gas industry (gas-works, production of mechanical apparatus, servants of the gas companies, &c), 15,211 persons; in telegraphy, 2,399; in photography, 2,366; steam navigation, 3,570; and in railways, 70,599, of whom the unskilled 1 F. and he that gives him some other in exchange, cannot make a better estimate of what is a proper equiva- lent, than by computing what cost him just as much labour and time; which in effect is no more than exchanging one man's labour in one thing for a time certain, for another man's labour in another thing for the same time." (1. The working-day of 12 hours embodies itself, e.g., in a money-value of 6s. The quantity of food obtained by the wife and also by the children at the pe- riod of rapid growth, is in many cases, in almost every county, deficient, and particularly in nitrogen." 1 The male and female servants living with the farmers themselves are sufficiently nour- ished. of Insp. From being a dwarf implement of the human organism, it expands and multiplies into the imple- ment of a mechanism created by man. If then, on the one hand, finished products are not only results, but also necessary conditions, of the labour-process, on the other hand, their assumption into that process, their contact with living labour, is the sole means by which they can be made to retain their character of use-values, and be utilised. Lastly, the average of these averages, in all branches of pro- THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 613 duction, gives us the composition of the total social capital of a country, and with this alone are we, in the last resort, concerned in the following investigation. of Pol. The building of new houses progresses very slowly, business very quickly. Factory legislation is therefore brought to a dead-lock before these 500 cubic feet of breathing space. The yard was a great square place with an open shed running all round it, and several large heaps of snow covered the paving-stones in the middle. 1715, 1717.) "Do you think that the women employed about the collieries are less moral than the women employed in the factories?" ". Whilst the cotton industry introduced child-slavery in England, it gave in the United States a stimulus to the trans- formation of the earlier, more or less patriarchal slavery, into a system of commercial exploitation. He sells his yarn at eighteenpence a pound, which is its exact value. We must, therefore, have recourse to their guardians, who are also their owners. Each man had a big paving-stone for a seat, and he chipped away at the rime-covered granite with a big hammer until he had broken up, and think! five bushels of it, and then he had done his day's work, and got his day's pay — threepence and an allowance of food. It is an old English proverb that "when thieves fall out, honest men come by their own," and, in fact, the noisy, passion- ate quarrel between the two fractions of the ruling class about the question, which of the two exploited the labourers the more shamefully, was on each hand the midwife of the truth. On the one hand, it spreads itself from its sources over all the markets of the world, in order to become absorbed, to various extents, into the different national spheres of circulation, to fill the conduits of currency, to replace abraded gold and silver coins, to supply the material of articles of luxury, and to petrify into hoards. Their number fell from 288,277 in 1851, to 204,962 in 1861. 44, 46. And just as during their lifetime, that is to say, during the con- tinued labour-process in which they serve, they retain their shape independent of the product, so, too, they do after their death. Compulsory work for the capitalist usurped the 1 "Wretch" is the recognised term in English Political Economy for the agricultural labourer. Although then, technically speaking, the old system of division of labour is thrown overboard by machinery, it hangs on in the factory, as a traditional habit handed down from Man- ufacture, and is afterwards S3 r stematically re-moulded and es* tablished in a more hideous form by capital, as a means of exploit- ing labour-power. On the other hand, la- bour may give us its product in such a form, that we can use it only as raw material, as is the case with cotton, thread, and yarn. The French do so, when holidays do not intervene. &c. Some of the farm- ers declare that the cots are "a great nuisance here, because they bring the poor." On the statement of one gentleman: "The poor are none the better for them; if you build 500 they will let fast enough, in fact, the more you build, the more they want" (according to him the houses give birth to the inhabitants, 692 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION who then by a law of Nature press on "the means of housing"). The many scattered customers, whom stray artisans until now had found in the numerous small producers working on their own account, concentrate themselves now into one great market 1 Mirabeau, 1. On the other hand, both opposing sides are commodities, unities of use-value and value. It is not possible to express the value of linen in linen. In modern agriculture, as in the urban industries, the increased productive- ness and quantity of the labour set in motion are bought at the cost of laying waste and consuming by disease labour-power itself. The augmentation of the rent of land subject to taxation (including houses, railways, mines, fisheries, &c), amounted for 1853 to 1864 to 38% or 3-^ % annu- ally. With the very earliest development of the circulation of commodities, there is also developed the necessity, and the pas- sionate desire, to hold fast the product of the first metamorphosis. Pol.," Paris Edn. Hence the sum of the means of subsistence necessary for the production of labour-power must include the means necessary for the labourer's substitutes, i.e., his children, in order that this race of peculiar commodity-owners may perpet- uate its appearance in the market. could live in plenty, and accumulate wealth," 1 not to speak of the 15th century, "the golden age of the English labour- er in town and country." We need not, however, go back so far. for the needle- women to lly lbs. His labour is now six times as effective as it was, for the purposes of useful production. The economic structure of capitalistic society has grown out of the economic structure of feudal society. If we take the statements of Arthur Young, a careful observ- er, though a superficial thinker, as to the agricultural labourer of 1771, the latter plays a very pitiable part compared with his predecessor of the end of the 14th century, "when the labourer . Hence their functions are totally independent of their weight, and consequently of all value. . But all methods for the production of surplus-value are at the same time methods of accumulation; and every extension of accumulation becomes again a means for the development of those methods. Every product of labour is, in all states of society, a use- value; but it is only at a definite historical epoch in a society's development that such a product becomes a commodity, viz., at the epoch when the labour spent on the production of a useful article becomes expressed as one of the objective qualities of that article, i.e., as its value. The labour required for the production of the cotton, the raw material of the yarn, is part of the labour necessary to pro- duce the yarn, and is therefore contained in the yarn. 2 Everything is just as it was. tea or =40 lbs. Lond., 1777, Vol. Senior, who may be called the bel-esprit of English economists, well known, alike for his economic "science," and for his beautiful style, was summoned from Oxford to Manchester, to learn in the latter place, the Political Economy that he taught in the former. In the latter case, the so- cial division of labour arises from the exchange between spheres of production, that are originally distinct and independent of one another. E.] EXPORT OF COTTON FROM THE UNITED STATES TO GREAT BRITAIN 1846.-401,949,393 lbs. A Yorkshire mine-owner himself calcu- lates (Times, 26th January, 1867), that putting on one side their office work, which absorbs all their time, each mine can be visited but once in ten years by an inspector. They must be conscious that much bodily and men- tal pain has thus been inflicted upon them from causes for which they were in no way answerable; to which, had it been in their power, they would have in no way consented; and against which they were powerless to struggle." (1. 240 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION Let us listen, for a moment, to the Factory Inspectors. "It is altogether incred- 1 According to a recent calculation, there are yet at least 4,000,000 cannibals in those parts of the earth which have already been explored. 22. Report." Evidence 173, p. to 7 p. We see thus: In the first case, it is not the diminished rate either of the absolute, or of the propor- tional, increase in labour-power, or labouring population, which causes capital to be in excess, but conversely the excess of capital that makes exploitable labour-power insufficient. Wind was too inconstant and uncontrollable, and besides, in England, the birthplace of Modern Industry, the use of water- power preponderated even during the manufacturing period. 1,543,161,789 lbs. 1 Capital- 1 See Liebig: "Die Chemie in ihrer Anwendung auf Agricultur und Physi- ologie," 7.Aufiage, 1862, and especially the "Einleitung in die Naturgesetze des Feldbaus," in the 1st Volume. The ratio of the necessary labour to the surplus-labour, which un- der average social conditions was 5:1, is now only 5:3. E.) THE RATE OF SURPLUS-VALUE 217 I call "necessary" labour-time, and the labour expended during that time I call "necessary" labour. 2 If the reader reminds me of Malthus, whose "Essay on Population" appeared in 1798, I remind him that this work in its first form is nothing more than a schoolboyish, superficial plagiary of De Foe, Sir James Steuart, Townsend, Franklin, Wallace, &c, and does not contain a single sentence thought out by himself. ... "A morsel of the salt meat or bacon, ... Because the commodity coat here plays the part of equivalent, because the use-value coat, as opposed to the linen, figures as an embodiment of value, therefore a definite number of coats suffices to express the definite quantity of value in the linen. At the most it appears to do so, and that only approximately, in the handicraft-like beginnings of manufacture, l and in that kind of agriculture on a large scale, which corresponds to the epoch of manufacture, and is distinguished from peasant agriculture, mainly by the number of the labourers simultaneously employed, and by the mass of the means of production concentrated for their use. II. 6. Several 'minders' have been fined for this offence, but without much general benefit. The sources of the supply of these labour- powers to London are Scotland, the western agricultural dis- tricts of England, and Germany. Let us take two commodities such as a coat and 10 yards of linen, and let the former be double the value of the latter, so that, if 10 yards of linen =W, the coat=2W. Next, their wages are so low as to threaten industry and wealth equally and perhaps more, but in another way." 2 A tariff of wages was fixed by law for town and country, for piece-work and day- work. 114 sqq. We allude here only to inconvertible paper money issued by the State and having compulsory circulation. If the value of those necessaries represent on an average the expenditure of six hours' labour," the workman must on an average work for six hours to produce that value. (W. 47.) Very curious is "the strong inclination ... The rate of surplus-value being 100%, the surplus-value lies in the surplus or net product of 40,000 lbs. . An analysis and comparison of the prices of commodities produced by handicrafts or manufactures, and of the prices of the same commodities produced by machinery, shows generally, that, in the product of machinery, the value due to the instru- ments of labour increases relatively, but decreases absolutely. 1 In the expression "value of labour," the idea of value is not only completely obliterated, but actually reversed. 297,375 . Hence, we may understand the decisive importance of the transformation of value and price of labour-power into the form of wages, or into the value and price of labour itself. Bailey, who have occupied themselves with the analysis of the form of value, have been unable to arrive at any result, first, because they confuse the form of value with value itseli; and second, because, under the coarse influence of the practical bourgeois, they exclusively give their attention to the quantitative aspect oi the ques- tion. 80-81, note 2, what he understands by "Vulgar Economy."—/?'. On the other hand, in M— G— M, the reflux of the money is conditioned by the very mode of its expenditure. 446 165 999 qs. c. And there may also be a further gain. With the dryest naivete he takes the mod- ern shopkeeper, especially the English shopkeeper, as the normal man. A - B -G. No attendance of less than 2y hours, nor more than 5 hours on any one day, shall be reckoned as part of the 150 hours. A few weeks ago 13 persons slept in it." 2 Dr. Hunter investigated 5,375 cottages of agricultural la- bourers, not only in the purely agricultural districts, but in all counties of England. 172-173.) DIVISION OP LABOUR AND MANUFACTURE 347 ing them into a fluid mass of glass. 2 But can surplus-value possibly originate anywhere else than in circulation, which is the sum total of all the mutual relations of commodity-owners, as far as they are determined by their commodities? 29, 30 passim.) 140 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION of great commercial transactions. Between 1849 and 1859, a rise of wages practically insignifi- cant, though accompanied by falling prices of corn, took place in the English agricultural districts. "The same cause," says Adam Smith, "which raises the wages of labour, the increase of stock, tends to increase its productive powers, and to make a smaller quantity of labour produce a greater quantity of work." Apart from natural conditions, such as fertility of the soil, &c, and from the skill of independent and isolated producers 1 "It we now return to our first inquiry, wherein it was shown that capital itself is only the result of human labour ... 3 "Those who are paid by piece-work ... Here also we find deterioration in the housing and other conditions at the source of the surplus-population. The more a country starts its development on the foundation of modern industry, like the United States, for example, the more rapid is this process of destruction. VALUE OF LABOUR-POWER AND WAGES 541 which it differs from all other commodities, is beyond the cognn sance of the ordinary mind. Because of their absolute danger to the community, houses in great numbers have lately been destroyed by the au- thorities in Newcastle and Gateshead. gives a decided preference to married females, especially those who have families at home dependent on them for support; they are attentive, docile, more so than unmarried females, and are compelled to use their utmost exertions to procure the necessaries of life. After this be- gins "over-time" which is paid a little better. But the production of machinery by machinery lessens its value relatively to its extension and effi- cacy. 3 One of the most shameful, the most dirty, and the worst paid kinds of labour, and one on which women and young girls are by preference employed, is the sorting of rags. He let them into the town in 1641. After this, one can judge of the good faith of the "execrable politi cal cant-monger," Edmund Burke, when he called the expression, "labouring poor,"— "execrable political cant." This sycophant who, in the pay of the Eng- lish oligarchy, played the romantic laudator temporis acti against the French Revolution, just as, in the pay of the North American Colonies, at the beginning of the American troubles, he had played the Liberal against the English oligarchy, was an out andout vulgar bourgeois. It was not till it did this, that it built up for itself a fitting technical foundation, and stood on its own feet. Between 1860 and 1865, therefore, the increase in looms was 11%, in spindles 3%, and in engine-power 3%, while the number of persons employed decreased 5-^-%. High rents, from £4 to £5; weekly wages of the man, 10s. The quantity of money requisite to make the payments, falling due on those dates all over the country, causes periodical, though merely superficial, perturbations in the economy of the medium of payment. . As a result, Belgium had in 1863, as compared with 1850, nearly doubled both the amount and the value of its exports of coal, iron, &c. With the exception of the extractive industries, in which the material for labour is provided immediately by Nature, such as mining, hunting, fishing, and agriculture (so far as the latter is confined to breaking up virgin soil), all branches of industry manipulate raw material, objects already filtered through labour, already products of labour. Thus spinning by machin- ery made weaving by machinery a necessity, and both togeth- er made the mechanical and chemical revolution that took place in bleaching, printing, and dyeing, imperative. On the other hand, in the same years, the Chartist movement and the 10 hours' agitation reached their highest point. The destruction of this cotton is therefore a necessary condition in the production of the yarn. 15. but will be running about." (1. Both, therefore, shorten that portion of the working-day which the labourer needs to produce his means of subsistence or their equivalent. The worker knows now when that which he sells is ended, and when his own begins; and by possessing a sure foreknowledge of this, is enabled to pre-arrange his own minutes for his own purposes." (1. Take, e.g., 1 Thus, e.g., in "Dritter Brief an v. 167, 168.) 3 Auguste Comte and his school might therefore, have shown that feu- dal lords are an eternal necessity in the same way that they have done in the case of the lords of capital. II., p. There would be an alteration, not in the length of the working-day, but in its division into necessary labour-time and surplus labour-time. But a usurer and money-glutton ? . 74, 75.) They resemble in fact the 30,000 "gallant Highlanders" whom Glasgow pigs together in its wynds and closes, with prostitutes and thieves. The February revolu- tion was necessary to bring into the world the 12 hours' law, 2 which is much more deficient than its English original. I have been in many such 6chools, where I have seen rows of children doing absolutely noth- ing; and this is certified as school attendance, and, in statistical returns, such children are set down as being educated." 2 In ScoU land the manufacturers try all they can to do without the chil- dren that are obliged to attend school. A tremendous railway accident has hurried hundreds of passengers into another world. Value Export- ed. Wakefield: "England and America," vol. To-day industrial supremacy implies commercial supremacy. Cornm." afforded the press sen- sational copy always welcome. E.g., when Steuart says: "Here, in slavery, was a forcible method of making mankind diligent," [for the non-workers] ... Mr. Rogers belongs to the Liberal School, is a personal friend of Cobden and Bright, and therefore no laudator temporis acti. And this form it possesses only in the shape of money. In this relation the coat is the mode of existence of value, is value em- bodied, for only as such is it the same as the linen. The money they had advanced to the plebeian debtor had been transformed via the means of subsistence into the flesh and blood of the debtor. Consequently it was the analysis of the prices of commodities that alone led to the determination of the magnitude of value, and it was the common expression of all commodities in money that alone led 1 "What are we to think of a law that asserts itself only by periodical revolutions? c, p. 211.) "Do they make any attempt of the kind (for providing instruction) by having schools at night?" "There are few collieries where night schools are held, and perhaps at those collieries a few boys do go to those schools; but they are so physically exhausted that it is to no purpose that they go there." (n. Since the surplus-value = £90, and the advanced capital = £500, we should, according to the usual way of reckoning, get as the rate of surplus-value (generally confounded with rate of profits) 18%, a rate so low as possibly to cause a pleasant sur- prise to Mr. Carey and other harmonisers. The serfs, as well as the free small proprietors, held land under very different tenures, and were therefore emancipated under very different economic conditions. 120.) 2 Cromwell's time forms an exception. Now, in what manner does every labourer add new labour and consequently new value? insomuch that they are inforced to employ mercenary bands of Switzers and the like, for ttieir battalions of foot; whereby also it comes to pass that those nations have much people and few soldiers." ('The Reign of Henry VII." Verbatim reprint from Rennet's Eng- land. What changes, is the value of this quantity. The vendor sells an exist- ing commodity, the purchaser buys as the mere representative of money, or rather of future money. . Tuckett: "A History of the Past and Present State of the La- bouring Population." Lond. 1696, p. Let the necessary labour-time be 6 hours, or the value of labour-power 3 shillings; also let the surplus-labour be 6 hours or the surplus-value 3 shillings. Passage of Modern Manufacture, and Domestic Industry into Modern Mechanical Industry. COMMODITIES 71 SECTION 4.— THE FETISHISM OF COMMODITIES AND THE SECRET THEREOF A commodity appears, at first sight, a very trivial thing, and easily understood. This simultaneous increase is therefore possible in two cases, one, the actual lengthening of the working-day, the other, an increase in the intensity of labour unaccompanied by such lengthening. of yarn. Prolongation of the Working-Day If machinery be the most powerful means for increasing the productiveness of labour — i. Bedrooms about 12 feet long and 10 broad, although many are smaller than this. But the inquiry showed the very opposite, namely, that the same cause which drove away malaria, the conversion of the land, from a morass in winter and a scanty pasture in summer, into fruitful corn land, created the exceptional death-rate of the infants. Moreover, the capitalist gets rich, not like the miser, in proportion to his personal labour and restricted consumption, but at the same rate as he squeezes out the labour-power of others, and enforces on the labourer abstinence from all life's enjoyments. 350,252 . Given the mass of surplus-value, then, the larger the one of these parts, the smaller is the other. And only by virtue of this function does gold, the equivalent commodity par excellence, become money. He exchanges his product directly for another commodity, with- out having first sold it. 2 "Rep of Insp of Fact, for 31st October, 1856," pp. . Outside these circumstances, it is no more capital than gold is intrinsically money, or sugar is the price of sugar .... of tea. This is essentially the result of a revolution in the mode of production of both metals. We shall, however, see, in Book III., that even in the case of average prices the assumption cannot he made in this very simple manner. (3 hours!) only to resume their work. capital is productive of no profit." (Ricar- do: "Princ. This latter weight l of yarn contains, it is true, by weight, no more than 13-^- lbs. The category, surplus labour-time, does not exist at all for him, since it is included in the normal working-day, which he thinks he has paid for in the day's wages. The equalisation of the most different kinds of labour can be the result only of an abstrac- tion from their inequalities, or of reducing them to their common denominator, viz., expenditure of human labour-power or human labour in the abstract. It brings forth living offspring, or, at the least, lays golden eggs. The expanded relative value-form is, however, nothing but the sum of the elementary relative expressions or equations of the first kind, such as 20 yards of linen=l coat 20 yards of linen=10 lbs. . 61-62. The in- creasing size of the prime movers, of the transmitting mechanism, and of the machines proper, the greater complication, multifor- mity and regularity of the details of these machines, as they more and more departed from the model of those originally made by manual labour, and acquired a form, untrammelled except by the conditions under which they worked, 1 the perfecting of the auto- matic system, and the use, every day more unavoidable, of a more refractory material, such as iron instead of wood— the solution of all these problems, which sprang up by the force of circum- stances, everywhere met with a stumbling-block in the personal restrictions, which even the collective labourer of Manufacture could not break through, except to a limited extent. The original researches of Mr. J. On the other hand the quan- tity of the circulating medium may decrease with a decreasing number of commodities, or with an increasing rapidity of their circulation. 4 From a social point of view, therefore, the working-class, even when not directly engaged in the labour-process, is just as much an appendage of capital as the ordinary instruments of labour. This two-fold effect, resulting from the two-fold character of labour, may be traced in various phenomena. The products of this common labour served partly as a re- serve fund against bad harvests and other accidents, partly as a public store for providing the costs of war, religion, and other common expenses. Their real change of value would appear from the diminished or increased quantity of com- modities produced in a given time. E.\ 338 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION and only one, of the constituent partial operations. 15), that is to say the labourer is principally interested in what he receives, the nominal sum of his wages, not in that which he gives, the amount of labour! 2 The effect of such an abnormal lessening of employment is quite different from that of a general reduction of the working-day, enforced by law. On this side of the Channel Owenism began to spread; on the other side, St. Simonism and Fourierism. It never assumes this form when isolated, but only when placed in a value or exchange relation with another commodity of a different kind. 3 Abstractedly considered, that is, apart from circumstances not immediately flowing from the laws of the simple circulation of commodities, there is in an exchange nothing (if we except the replacing of one use-value by another) but a metamorphosis, a mere change in the form of the commodity. . Lassalle: "Die Philosophie Herakleitos des Dunkeln." Berlin, 1858, Vol. It is the same here ;with the housing 1 I. This mode oi production pre-sup- poses parcelling of the soil, and scattering of the other means of production. (1863-1866), give cases where the worker not only receives no wages, but becomes, by means of his labour, and of the penal regulations, the debtor to boot, of his worthy master. till 12 noon next day, for a week together, and sometimes for three shifts together, e.g., from Monday morn- ing till Tuesday night." "Another, now 12, has worked in an iron foundry at Stavely from 6 a. c, p. S. My illustration is entirely on the lines of those given by the above named economists. 147. In proportion as capitalist production is developed in a coun- try, in the same proportion do the national intensity and productivi- ty of labour there rise above the international level. Its value is, therefore, equal to the average value of one labour-power, multiplied by the number of labour-powers employed. 171, n. c, t.III, pp. The minimum length of the working-day is fixed by this necessary but contractile portion of it. If a question be asked them, they never raise their eyes from their work from fear of losing a single moment." The "long stick" is used by the mistresses as a stimulant more and more as the working-hours are prolonged. M.'s Secre- taries of Embassy and Legation on the Manufactures, Commerce, &c, No. 6, 1863." The want of connexion alone, between the processes into which the pro- duction of articles that merely consist of parts fitted together is split up, makes it very difficult to convert such a manufacture into a branch of modern industry carried on by machinery; but in the case of a watch there are two other impediments in addition, the minuteness and delicacy of its parts, and its character as an article of luxury. All of these, I believe, are either directly or indi- rectly induced by the impure, overheated air of the apartments in which the hands are employed, and the want of sufficient comfortable clothing to protect them from the cold, damp atmosphere, in winter, when going to their homes." (1. 8 The number of shepherds increased from 12,517 to 25,559. The mode of production in which the product takes the form of a commodity, or is produced directly for exchange, is the most general and most embryonic form of bourgeois production. On the one hand all labour is, speaking physiologically, an expenditure of human labour-power, and in its character of iden- tical abstract human labour, it creates and forms the value of commodities. This tendency is nurtured by the very nature of the sewing-machine, the manifold uses of which push on the concentration, under one roof, and one management, of previously separated branches of a trade. c. c. Piece-work has, therefore, a tendency, while raising individual wages above the average, to lowei this average itself. On the other hand, any general expression of value common to all is directly excluded; for, in the equation of value of each com- modity, all other commodities now appear only under the form of 66 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION equivalents. The Irish- man, banished by sheep and ox, re-appears on the other side of the ocean as a Fenian, and face to face with the old queen of the seas rises, threatening and more threatening, the young giant Republic: Acerba fata Romanos agunt Scelusque fraternae necis. This metamorphosis, this conversion of money into capital, takes place both within the sphere of circulation and also outside it; within the circulation, THE LABOUR-PROCESS 195 because conditioned by the purchase of the labour-power in the market; outside the circulation, because what is done within it is only a stepping-stone to the production of surplus-value, a process which is entirely confined to the sphere of production. c, p. The completion of its first metamorphosis follows only at a later period. 1. The prelude of the revolution that laid the foundation of the capitalist mode of production, was played in the last third of the 15th, and the first decade of the 16th century. Since the metamorphosis of commodities, or the development of their value-form, appears here under a new aspect, money also acquires a fresh function; it becomes the means of payment. Were they not both heavy, they could not enter into this relation, and the one could therefore not serve as the expression of the weight of the other. "It's a great many hours in a day (6 a. The difference in the rates of increase is due to the migration from country to town. But at this point the mistakes also begin. With a given length of this work- ing-day, whether its limits are fixed physically or socially, the mass of surplus-value can only be increased by increasing the num- ber of labourers, i.e., of the labouring population. without an in- terval for meal-time of at least 30 minutes. For the present, let this one quotation from the official report of Leonard Horner suffice: "I have heard some mill-owners speak with inexcusable levityof some of the accidents; such, for instance, as the loss of a finger being a trifling matter. 15 Of these, 30,501 are females. . . If it be said that 100 millions of people would be required in England to spin with the old spinning-wheel the cotton that is now spun with mules by 500,000 people, this does not mean that the mules took the place of those millions who never existed. This portion of the working-day, I name surplus labour-time, and to the labour expended during that time, I give the name of surplus-labour. In order that the law of supply and demand may not be broken, these gentlemen draw their "labour-supply . On the other hand, the working-day of 12 hours is, as regards him, now represented by 24 articles instead of 12. Schweig- hauser, 1802.) MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OP COMMODITIES 101 the standard of money. c, t. The production of commodities, their circulation, and that more developed form of their circulation called commerce, these form the historical ground-work from which it rises. 1 The demand for children's labour often resembles in form the inquiries for negro slaves, such as were formerly to be read among the advertisements in American jour- nals. This antagonistic movement has its origin in the two-fold character of labour. Tremenheere, commis sioner to examine into "the grievances complained of by the journeymen bakers," &c, Lond. 2 Philanthropic English economists, like Mill, Rogers, Goldwin Smith, Fawcett, &c, and liberal manufacturers like John Bright & Co., ask the Eng- lish landed proprietors, as God asked Cain after Abel, Where are our thou- sands of freeholders gone? If its accumulation, on the one hand, increases the demand for labour, it increases on the other the supply of labourers by the "setting free" of them, whilst at the same time the pressure of the unemployed compels those that are employed to furnish more labour, and therefore makes the supply of labour, to a certain extent, independent of the supply of labourers. Both are uses of the sandal, for even he who exchanges the sandal for the money or food he is in want of, makes use of the sandal as a sandal. CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO CAPITAL 583 The accumulation of the first additional capital of £2,000 pre-supposes a value of £10,000 belonging to the capitalist by vir- tue of his "primitive labour," and advanced by him. 1. Luxury enters into capital's expenses of representa- tion. The value of A, thus expressed in the use-value of B, has taken the form of relative value. On the side of value, it is determined by the proportion in which it is divided into constant capital or value of the means of production, and variable capital or value of labour-power, the sum total of wages. . Say answers: "Quant a la difficulte qu'eleve Mr. Ricardo en disant que, par des procedes mieux entendus un million de personnes peuvent produire deux fois, trois fois autant de richesses, sans produire plus de valeurs, cette difficulte n'est pas une lorsque Ton considere, ainsi qu'on le doit, la production comme un echange dans le- quel on donne les services productifs de son travail, de sa terre, et de ses capitaux, pour obtenir des produits. Such a fall in the value of labour-power implies, however, that the same necessaries of life which were formerly produced in ten hours, can now be produced in nine hours. It is, therefore, in the early days of the life of ma- chinery that this special incentive to the prolongation of the work- ing-day makes itself felt most acutely. The greatness of Watt's genius showed itself in the specification of the patent that he took out in April, 1784. In a factory, suppose that 100 labourers working 8 hours a day yield 800 working-hours. c, pp. 108, n. c, p. 6); or as Butler says — "The value of a thing Is just as much as it will bring." COMMODITIES 37 A given commodity, e.g., a quarter of wheat is exchanged for x blacking, y silk, or z gold, &c— in short, for other commodi- ties in the most different proportions. The greater dearness of the means of subsistence is never forgot- ten there. With deep insight into Political Economy, however, the working-day is not taken in its ordinary sense, but as the working-day necessary to the pro- duction of an average daily product; and that average daily prod- uct is determined in so crafty a way that no Cyclops would be done with it in 24 hours. 2 But here we are dealing with exchange-value. "Had it not been for the violent collisions and interruptions resulting from erroneous views among the factory operatives, the factory system would have been developed still more rapidly and beneficially for all concerned." Then he exclaims again: "Fortunately for the state of society in the cotton districts of Great Britain, the improve- ments in machinery are gradual." "It" (improvement in machin- ery) "is said to lower the rate of earnings of adults by displac- ing a portion of them, and thus rendering their number super- abundant as compared with the demand for their labour. 8 1. i ^Report of Tnsp. One firm in Newcastle, who formerly produced 350,000 lbs. 1 "Rep. . of Insp. MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 391 labour it saves, in other words, that the degree of its productive- ness does not depend on the difference between its own value and the value of the implement it replaces. This fact must therefore make itself plainly visible in the currency of money. Since all commodities are merely particular equivalents of money, the latter being their universal equivalent, they, with regard to the latter as the universal commodity, play the parts of particular commodities. 72. However great the fall in its value, 12 ounces of gold still have 12 times the value of 1 ounce; and in prices, the only thing consid- ered is the relation between different quantities of gold. 2.) 1 It will be seen from the following quotation from my book which appeared in 1859, why I take no notice in the text of an opposite form: MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OF COMMODITIES 137 The obligations falling due within a given period, represent the sum of the prices of the commodities, the sale of which gave rise to those obligations. The latter aspect will not be considered until we come to the third book, to which, with the object of treating them in their proper connexion, we also relegate many other points that relate to the present question. the common measure of buying and selling, every body who hath anything to sell, and cannot procure chapmen for it, is pres- ently apt to think, that want of money in the kingdom, or country, is the cause why his goods do not go off; and so, want of money is the common cry; which is a great mistake... What- ever is productively consumed is capital, and it becomes capital by con- sumption." (James Mill, 1. 4 3 7 " 8. c, c. Dunning: "Trades' Unions and Strikes," Lond. Accumulation, therefore, presents itself on the one hand as increasing concentration of the means of production, and of the command over labour; on the other, as repulsion of many individual capitals one from another. But he might also let the 100 labourers work 12 hours instead of 8, and then the instruments of labour already to hand would be enough. The division of labour converts the product of labour into a commodity, and thereby makes necessary its further conversion into money. of Fact.," 30th April, 1859, pp. xv.) "The devil is a good person. "Can the labourer," he asks, "merely with his arms and legs, produce commodities out of nothing? The time during which the labourer works, is the time during which the capitalist consumes the labour-power he has purchased of him. 1 The labourer therefore constantly produces mate- rial, objective wealth, but in the form of capital, of an alien power that dominates and exploits him; and the capitalist as constantly produces labour-power, but in the form of a subjec- tive source of wealth, separated from the objects in and by which it can alone be realised; in short he produces the labourer, but as a wage-labourer. We have seen that the development of the capitalist mode of production and of the productive power of labour — at once the cause and effect of accumulation — enables the capitalist, with the same outlay of variable capital, to set in action more labour by greater exploitation (extensive or intensive) of each individ- ual labour-power. This primitive accumulation plays in Political Economy about the same part as original sin in theology. of yarn on the one hand, and in the 10 lbs. . Bodily labour, it's a primitive institution of God . 69, 70, 71, 72, 92, 93, and that collected by Sub-Inspector A., Nos. We assumed above that while the total capital increases, its composi- tion remains the same, because the conditions of production re- main constant. This process, however, does not present itself as accumulation of capi- tal, nor as the function of a capitalist, so long as the labourer's means of production, and with them, his product and means of subsistence, do not confront him in the shape of capital. We will assume that the two gold pieces, in considera- tion of which our weaver has parted with his linen, are the meta- morphosed shape of a quarter of wheat. Thus "Adam Smith nowhere undervalues the services which the natural agents and machin- ery perform for us, but he very justly distinguishes the nature of the value which they add to commodities ..as they perform their work gratuitously, the assistance which they afford us, adds nothing to value in exchange." (Ric, 1. That the Kaffirs know what they are about is shown by the following: at the same time that the official British Health CAPITALIST PRODUCTION is far from having turned his goods into money, when he has ex- pressed their value in a price or in imaginary money, and that it does not require the least bit of real gold, to estimate in that metal millions of pounds' worth of goods. If the ratio of surplus-labour to necessary labour were 100%, these 66 men would produce in one hour a value of 30 shillings, although their wages, 15 shillings, represent only their labour for half an hour. ... I think it is. To do the work of a steam-engine would require 66 men, at a total cost of 15s. It is mere child's-play for it to crush a block of granite into powder, yet it is no less capable of driving, with a succession of light taps, a nail into a piece of soft wood. In this place, however, it will be enough to give a few examples from those branches of the lace-making and straw-plaiting industries that are not yet carried on by the aid of machinery, and that as yet do not compete with branches carried on in factories or in manufactories. At their birth the great banks, decorated with national ti- tles, were only associations of private speculators, who placed themselves by the side of governments, and, thanks to the privileges they received, were in a position to advance money to the State. It dates from the last third of the 17th century, and the first attempt to put it in practice on a national scale was made a century afterwards, during the French bourgeois revolution. The lynx eye of Capi- tal discovered that the Act of 1844 did not allow 5 hours' work before mid-day without a pause of at least 30 minutes for re- freshment, but prescribed nothing of the kind for work after mid- day. . 4 The price of the necessary means of subsistence is therefore fully twice, and that of clothing exactly twice, as much as they were 20 years before. etablir en regie generale, que moins l'autorite preside a la division du travail dans l'interieur de la societe, plus la division du travail se developpe dans l'interieur de l'atelier, et plus elle y est soumise a l'autorite d'unseul. Let Chanticleer announce the morn in vain! Deo has commanded the work of the girls to be done by the Nymphs, and now they skip lightly over the wheels, so that the shaken axles revolve with their spokes and pull round the load of the revolving stones. . This family received relief from the workhouse, and it furnished them with just one scanty meal per day. c, p. 276 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION but four shillings, he would be obliged to work but four days; but as wages in this kingdom are much higher in proportion to the price of necessaries. 8 (Senior, "Principes fondamentaux de l'ficon. 664 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION villages without any sanitary provisions, outside the con- trol of the local boards, very profitable to the contractor, who exploits the labourers in two-fold fashion— as soldiers of industry and as tenants. saw on her journey to the Crimea. This was a favourite cry of the cotton lords at the time they were first threatened with the Factory Acts. The other part of the constant capital, raw material and auxiliary substances, is constantly reproduced in less than a year; those produced by agriculture, for the most part annually. per piece, and thus earns in 12 hours 3 shillings. The ratio of the corvee to the necessary labour ^- or 66-r- % gives a much smaller rate of surplus-value than that which regulates the la- bour of the English agricultural or factory labourer. of yarn, or in 1 2 2 hour 1-x- lbs.; consequently he produces in 8 hours 13 -~- lbs., or a partial product equal in value to all the cotton that is spun in a whole day. makes long hours of work desirable." With the increased use of machinery, &c, "the motives to long hours of work will become greater, as the only means by which a large proportion of fixed capital can be made profitable." (1. 750 CHAPTER XXXI GENESIS OF THE INDUSTRIAL CAPITALIST The genesis of the industrial 1 capitalist did not proceed in such a gradual way as that of the farmer. In merchants' capital, the two extremes, the money that is thrown upon the market, and the augmented money that is withdrawn from the market, are at least connected by a purchase and a sale, in other words by the movement of the circulation. Whether the combined work- ing-day, in a given case, acquires this increased productive power, because it heightens the mechanical force of labour, or extends its sphere of action over a greater space, or contracts the field of produc- tion relatively to the scale of production, or at the critical moment sets large masses of labour to work, or excites emulation between individuals and raises their animal spirits, or impresses on the sim- ilar operations carried on by a number of men the stamp of con- tinuity and many-sidedness, or performs simultaneously different operations, or economises the means of production by use in com- mon, or lends to individual labour the character of average social labour— whichever of these be the cause of the increase, the spe- cial productive power of the combined working-day is, under all circumstances, the social productive power of labour, or the produc- tive power of social labour. The capitalist has bought the labour-power at its day-rate. Who will get ready the meals, do the washing and mending? Work from 5 in the morning till 7 in the evening is consid- ered "reduced" and "moderate." Both boys and girls of 6 and even of 4 years of age are employed. "The speed of the spindles has increased upon throstles 500, and upon mules 1,000 revolutions a minute, i.e., the speed of the throstle spindle, which in 1839 was 4,500 times a minute, Is now (1862) 5,000; and of the mule spindle, that was 5,000, is now 6,000 times a minute, amounting in the former case to one- tenth, and in the second case to one-fifth additional increase. W. All must, forced by blows, work on until death puts an end to their sufferings and their distress." ("Diod. (Holinshed, "Description of Eng- land," Vol 1. If now, in a c, the working-day of 12 hours, we move the point b to b', b c becomes b' c; the sur- plus-labour increases by one half, from 2 hours to 3 hours, although the working-day remains as before at 12 hours. Labour being as proper for the bodies' health as eating is for its living; for what pains a man saves by ease, he will find in disease. "The work of a London journeyman baker begins, as a rule, at about eleven at night. Pubblica," ed. Coalition of the labourers is treated as a heinous crime from the 14th century to 1825, the year of the repeal of the laws against Trades' Unions. c, J. Is not the real interest of the nation similar? So soon as machin- ery sets free a part of the workmen employed in a given branch of industry, the reserve men are also diverted into new channels of employment, and become absorbed in other branches; meanwhile the original victims, during the period of transition, for the most part starve and perish. ... We can therefore conceive the situation of those hands who were employed for only 3, A 3y or 4 days a week, or for only 6 hours a day f Even in 1863, after a comparative improvement had set in, the weekly wages of 1 1. See Rouard de Card, "On the Falsifications of the Materials of the Sacrament." ("De la falsification des substances sacramentelles," Paris, 1856.) 2 "Report, &c, relative to the grievances complained of by the jour- neymen bakers, &c, London, 1862," and "Second Report, &c, London, 1863." 250 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION the dough is 'made'; and with a sack under him, and another rolled up as a pillow, he sleeps for about a couple of hours. By an imperial Edict of 19th Feb., 1685, its use was for- bidden throughout all Germany. x The last part of this statute provides, that certain poor people may be employed by a place or by persons, who are willing to give them food and drink and to find them work. Here capital can grow into powerful masses in a single hand because there it has been withdrawn from many individual hands. There are, however, states of society in which one and the same man does tailoring and weaving alternately, in which case these two forms of labour are mere modifications of the labour of the same indi- vidual, and no special and fixed functions of different persons; just as the coat which our tailor makes one day, and the trousers which he makes another day, imply only a variation in the labour of one and the same individual. We see then that that which determines the magnitude of the value of any article is the amount of labour socially necessary, or the labour-time socially necessary for its production. Apply &c." 2 The phrase "what can pass for 13 years," has reference to the fact, that by the Factory Act, children under 13 years may work only 6 hours. . The same thing holds of the alluvial lands won by human endeavour, as in the island of Axholme and other parishes on the banks of the 1 A similar movement is seen during the last ten years in France; in proportion as capitalist production there takes possession of agriculture, it drives the "surplus" agricultural population into the towns. One may thus gauge the utopianism of the bimetallist idea that compulsory international quotation will raise silver again to the old value ratio of 1:15-^-. 177 PART III THE PRODUCTION OF ABSOLUTE SURPLUS- VALUE CHAPTER VII THE LABOUR-PROCESS AND THE PROCESS OF PRODUCING SURPLUS-VALUE SECTION 1.— THE LABOUR-PROCESS OR THE PRODUCTION OF USE-VALUES The capitalist buys labour-power in order to use it; and labour- power in use is labour itself. Even the ideas of day and night, of rustic simplicity in the old statutes, became so confused that an English judge, as late as 1860, needed a quite Talmudic sagacity to explain "judicially" what was day and what was night. In the automatic factories, as in all the great workshops, where machinery enters as a factor, or where only the modern division of labour is carried out, large numbers of boys are employed up to the age of maturity. This is their plain, homely, bodily form. Moreover, as regards the examined families of the agricultural population, it appeared that more than a fifth were with less than the esti- mated sufficiency of carbonaceous food, that more than one-third were withless than the estimated sufficiency of nitrogenous food, and that in three counties (Berkshire, Oxfordshire, and Somer- setshire), insufficiency of nitrogenous food was the average local diet." 1 Among the agricultural labourers, those of England, the wealthiest part of the United Kingdom, were the worst fed. Thus, when the industrial cycle is in the phase of crisis, a general fall in the price of commod- ities is expressed as a rise in the value of money, and, in the phase of prosperity, a general rise in the price of commodities, as a fall in the value of money. 1 The price of labour-time itself is finally determined by the equation; value of a day's labour= daily value of labour-power. Answer: "C'est ce qu'une chose vaut," and what is "prix"? One occurs at Sheffield at the end of 1866. an hour, and to do the work of a horse, 32 men, at a total cost of 8s. 11. However this may be, the mere continuity of the process, the simple reproduction, brings about some other wonderful changes, which affect not only the variable, but the total capital. On their own authority they transformed their nominal right into a right of private prop- erty, and as this brought them into collision with their clansmen, resolved to drive them out by open force. In addition to this, economy and judgment in the con- sumption and preparation of the means of subsistence becomes impossible. On the other hand, he always finds this peasantry turning up again, although in diminished number, and always under worse conditions. It was not till 1758, and this CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO CAPITAL 595 marks an epoch, that a person actually engaged in business was seen with an equipage of his own. 1 George II. As the production of commodities further develops, every producer of commodities is compelled to make sure of the nexus rerum or the social pledge. Therefore also riches, such as Chrematistic strives for, are unlimited. Lightbourne: "Am 13 . When once the most fitting proportion has been experimental- ly established for the numbers of the detail labourers in the various groups when producing on a given scale, that scale can be extended only by employing a multiple of each particular group. But not so the rate of 100 100 aurplus-value, the real degree of exploitation of labour. . 24,945 St. 1 The data of the text are put together from the materials of the "Agri- cultural Statistics, Trelaud, General Abstracts, Dublin," for the years 1860, et seq., and "Agricultural Statistics, Ireland. "If," he says, with the affected naivete of a child of 8 years, "if it be advantageous, to develop the skill of the workman more and more, so that he is capable of producing, with the same or with a less quantity of labour, a constantly increasing quantity of commodities, it must also be advantageous, that he should avail himself of the help of such machinery as will assist him most effectively in the attainment of this result." (MacCulloch: "Princ. And ... Vanderlint, who fancies that the prices of commodities in a country are determined by the quantity of gold and silver to be found in it, asks himself why Indian com- modities are so cheap. l In the London Economist of the 15th April, 1848, the same cry was again raised by James Wilson, an economic mandarin of high standing: this time in opposition to the 10 hours' bill. Such a general and nominal rise of prices has the same effect as if the values had been expressed in weight of silver instead of in weight of gold. Strange, Senior Physician of the Worcester General Hospital, from whose work on "Health" (1864) this passage is taken, writes in a letter to Mr. White, one of the commissioners: "I have had opportunities formerly, when in Lancashire, of observing the effects of night-work upon children, and I have no hesitation in saying, contrary to what some employers were fond of asserting, those children who were subjected to it soon suffered in their health." (1. As a matter of history, capital, as opposed to landed property, invariably takes the form at first of money; it appears as moneyed wealth, as the capital of the merchant and of the usurer. If instead of working for the capitalist, he worked independently on his own account, he would, other things being equal, still be obliged to labour for the same number of hours, in order to produce the val- ue of his labour-power, and thereby to gain the means of sub- sistence necessary for his conservation or continued reproduction. Since the magnitude of the value of a commodity represents only the quantity of labour embodied in it, it follows that all commodities, when taken in certain proportions, must be equal in value. The gallon loaf per week is what we suppose sufficient for the main- tenance of every person in the family for the week; and the 3d. The modern hawkers of Free-trade, who must get rid of their article at any price, on the other hand, lay most stress on the quantitative aspect of the relative form of value. The real facts, which are travestied by the optimism of econ- omists, are as follows: The labourers, when driven out of the workshop by the machinery, are thrown upon the labour-market, and there add to the number of workmen at the disposal of the capitalists. . 3 They were acting in the interests of the ill-advised operatives them- selves, "in order to be able to pay them higher wages." "This was the only possible plan by which to maintain, under the Ten Hours' Act, the industrial supremacy of Great Britain." "Perhaps it may be a little difficult to detect irregularities under the relay system; but what of that? Thus the hours of rest were turned into hours of enforced idleness, which drove the youths to the pot-house, and the girls to the brothel. 6 hours surplus-labour Surplus-value of 3 sh. The circumstance, that on the one hand the daily sustenance of labour-power costs only half a day's labour, while on the other hand the very same labour-power can work during a whole day, that consequently the value which its use during one day creates, is double what he pays for that use, this circumstance is, without doubt, a piece of good luck for the buyer, but by no means an injury to the seller. 2 1. The num- ber of spindles and looms in 1856 was respectively 33,503,580 of the former, and 369,205 of the latter, which, reckoning the force of the nominal horse-power required to be the same as in 1850, would require a force equal to 175,000 horses, but the actual power given in the return for 1856 is 161, 435, less by above 10,000 horses than, calculating upon the basis of the return of 1850, the factories ought to have required in 1856." 3 "The facts thus brought out by the Return (of 1856) appear to be that the factory system is in- creasing rapidly; that although the same number of hands are employed in proportion to the horse-power as at former periods, there are fewer hands employed in proportion to the machinery; that the steam-engine is enabled to drive an increased weight of machinery by economy of force and other methods, and that an increased quantity of work can be turned off by improvements in machinery, and in methods of manufacture, by increase of speed of the machinery, and by a variety of other causes." 4 1 This was altered in the "Parliamentary Return" of 1862. During the years 1855, 1856 and 1857, the excess in France of gold-imports over gold-exports amounted to £ 41 ,580,000, while the excess of silver-exports over silver-imports was £ 14,704,000. The existence of such a class is inexplicable from the standpoint we have so far reached, viz., that of simple circulation. According, therefore, as the measure of value is gold, silver, or copper, the value of the ton of iron will be expressed by very different prices, or will be represented by very different quantities of those metals respectively. If the fol- lowers of Ricardo answer Bailey somewhat rudely, and by no means convinc- ingly, the reason is to be sought in this, that they were unable to find in Ricardo's own works any key to the hidden relations existing between value and its form, exchange-value. 454. It is the measure of value inasmuch as it is the socially recognised incarnation of human ratio soon came into conflict again with the real one. In remedy- ing of this inconvenience the king's wisdom was admirable, and the parliament's at that time . A king is him that has all the money and gold. The diseases most observable amongst them are phthisis, bronchitis, irregularity of uterine functions, hysteria in its most aggravated forms, and rheumatism. In our presence, in one quarter of this wonder- ful metropolis, are packed— next door to the most enormous accumulation of wealth the world ever saw — cheek by jowl with this are 40,000 helpless, starving people. The con- tract by which he sold to the capitalist his Labour-power proved, so to say, in black and white that he disposed of himself freely. c, p. 136 sq. On account of the high wages, says his disciple, Merivale, there is in the colonies "the urgent desire for cheaper and more subservient labourers — for a class to whom the capi- talist might dictate terms, instead of being dictated to by them ... If we may trust the best statistical writers of that age, not less than 160,000 proprietors who, with their families, must have made up more than a seventh of the whole population, derived their subsistence from little freehold estates. 424.) 2 Even Watts, the apologetic, remarks: "It would be a great improve- ment to the system of piece-work, if all the men employed on a job were partners in the contract, each according to his abilities, instead of one man being interested in over-working his fellows for his own benefit." (1. 6, and the detailed expla- nation of the "shifting system," by Factory Inspectors Howell and Saunders, in "Reports, &c, for 31st October, 1848." See also the petition to the Queen from the clergy of Ashton and vicinity, in the spring of 1849, against the "shift system." 2 Cf. for example, "The Factory Question and the Ten Hours Bill." By R. As regards the extent of the evil, it may suffice to refer to the evidence which Dr. Hunter has compiled from the last census, that destruction of houses, notwithstanding increased local demands for them, had, during the last ten years, been in progress in 821 separate parishes or townships of England, so that irrespectively of persons who had been forced to become non-resident (that is in the parishes in which they work), these parishes and townships were receiving in 1861, as compared with 1 1 1851, a population 5^- per cent, greater, into house-room k-r per cent, less .... At the same time a change took place in the nature of relative surplus-value. Without this reflux, the operation fails, or the process is inter- rupted and incomplete, owing to the absence of its complementary and final phase, the sale. by whose labour and skill such great results have been achieved." 1 And all that holds of the potteries in England is true of those in Scotland. The price of the la- bour-power is fixed by the contract, although it is not realised till later, like the rent of a house. When we say that revenue is saved, and added to capital, what we mean is, that the portion of revenue, so said to be added to capital, is consumed by productive instead of unproductive labourers. Their rents doubled, trebled, quadrupled, "and in one instance, increased sixfold in eighteen years.'* (1. The final report of the Ch. Empl. The simple circulation of commodities begins with a sale and ends with a purchase, while the circulation of money as capital begins with a purchase and ends with a sale. Of the 150,000 persons employed in England in the produc- tion of lace, about 10,000 fall under the authority of the Fac- tory Act, 1861. 1846.-2,958,457 lbs. If in consequence of a new invention, machinery of a particular kind can be produced by a diminished expenditure of labour, the old machinery becomes depreciated more or less, and conse- quently transfers so much less value to the product. L. Gerhardt in 1843, each series of which has its own general algebraic formula. It is the same thing when capital "abstains" from protective measures against dangerous machinery in the factory, from appliances for ventilation and for safety in mines, &c. In so far as they actually take the place of gold to the same amount, their movement is subject to the laws that regulate the currency of money itself. It is of the highest impor- tance, he says, "to keep separate the passion for expenditure and the passion for accumulation." 4 The capitalists having long been good livers and men of the world, uttered loud cries. Hence the length of the working-day being constant, a day's labour of increased intensity will be in- corporated in an increased value, and, the value of money remain^ ing unchanged, in more money. The cottages gener- ally crouch under some bank, or often in a ravine or quarry, and none but the smallest sheep and native cattle can live on the pastures.... The instrument of labour strikes down the labourer. 3 Report (First) &c. — F. 16, 19, 18. We may reduce these phenomena to two great classes: (1.) Change of wages with the changing length of the working-day. As on the first day of production, the original produce-formers, now turned into the creators of the material elements of capital — man and Na- ture—still work together. The mystical character of commodities does not originate, therefore, in their use-value. II. Every condition of the problem is satisfied, while the laws that regulate the exchange of commodities, have been in no way violated. But if a number of carriages are being made simultaneously, some may be in the hands of the gilders while othtTS are going through an earlier process. "These gangs will sometimes travel many miles from their own village; they are to be met morning and evening on the roads, dressed in short petticoats, with suit- able coats and boots, and sometimes trousers, looking wonder- fully strong and healthy, but tainted with a customary immoral- ity and heedless of the fatal results which their love of this busy and independent life is bringing on their unfortunate off- spring who are pining at home." 1 Every phenomenon of the fac- tory districts is here reproduced, including, but to a greater extent, ill-disguised infanticide, and dosing children with opi- ates. And for the present it interests us just as little. The average age at which the children commence work is six years, but in many cases it is below five. If this means that the number of actual sales is equal to the number of purchases, it is mere tautology. 368, 7, 370, 280, 281, 321, 370, 475. In so far then, as its instruments and subjects are themselves products, labour consumes products in order to create products, or in other words, consumes one set of products by turning them into means of production for another set. The effect is the same as if the means of production had cost less. 48, note). Comm.," 4tb Rep., 1865, p. 3 two ... Comm., II. And yet, they both gain, or ought to gain. ,,«,,_, 2 By I. It will be remembered that the year 1857 brought one of the great 1 i. Without entering into the question of health, no one will hesitate, I think, to admit that, in a moral point of view, so entire an absorption of the time of the working-classes, without intermission, from the early age of 13, and in trades not subject to restriction, much younger, must be extremely pre- judicial, and is an evil greatly to be deplored.... 13.)Thesame "high" Court of Justice discovered, during the Ameri- can Civil War, a verbal ambiguity which exactly reversed the meaning ol the law against the arming of pirate ships. Redgrave, Factory Inspector — in the Journal of Arts, 5th January, 1872.) 2 "Rep. For instance, "Commerce ... Thanks to these new mechanical combinations, I have reduced the number of grown-up men from 1,500 to 750. d. The opposition or contrast existing inter- nally in each commodity between use-value and value, is, there- fore, made evident externally by two commodities being placed in such relation to each other, that the commodity whose value it is sought to express, figures directly as a mere use-value, while the commodity in which that value is to be expressed, figures di- rectly as mere exchange- value. E.) 56 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION contrary, the commodity coat now figures only as a definite quantity of some article. of yarn can be made. On a former page we saw that the value of the yarn is equal to the sum of the new value created during the production of that yarn plus the value previously existing in the means of produc- tion. The capitalist has his own views of this ultima Thule, the necessary limit of the working-day. Children of 8 might, if they began work at noon, be employed from 12 to 1, 1 hour; from 2 to 4 in the afternoon, \ 2 hours; from 5 to 8.30 in the evening, 3— hours; in all, the le- 1 gal 6^ hours. The expanded form of value comes into actual ex- istence for the first time so soon as a particular product of labour, such as cattle, is no longer exceptionally, but habitually, ex- changed for various other commodities. 139, 141, 143, 158, 160). Within the limits of what is strictly necessary, the individual consump- tion of the working-class is, therefore, the reconversion of the means of subsistence given by capital in exchange for labour-power, into fresh labour-power at the disposal of capital for exploitation. Let the value of the linen remain constant, while the value of the coat varies. Daily or weekly wages remain, despite all this, unchanged. With the increase of capital, the difference between the capi- tal employed and the capital consumed increases. of yarn weekly per spindle. The history of the regulation of the working-day in certain branches of production, and the struggle still going on in others in regard to this regulation, prove conclusively that the isolated labourer, the labourer as "free" vendor of his la- bour-power, when capitalist production has once attained a cer- tain stage, succumbs without any power of resistance. Here we have again the principle of co-operation in its sim- plest form, the simultaneous employment of many doing the same thing; only now, this principle is the expression of an organic relation. In piece-wages it seems at first sight as if the use-value bought from the labourer was, not the function of his labour-power, living labour, but labour already realised in the product, and as if the price of this labour was determined, not as with time-wages, by ,, f ,. Engels showed in 1844 exactly the same horrors, exactly the same transient canting outcries of "sensational literature." But frightful increase of "deaths by starvation" in 1 H. I will suppose a manufacturer to invest £100,000:— £80,000 in his mill and machinery, and £20,000 in raw material and wages. And spindles, looms, raw material, are now transformed, from means of independent existence for the spinners and weavers, into means for commanding them and sucking out of them unpaid labour. Here, on the contrary, where we con- THE LABOUR-PROCESS 189 sider the labour of the spinner only so far as it is value-creating, i.e., a source of value, his labour differs in no respect from the la- bour of the man who bores cannon, or (what here more nearly con- cerns us), from the labour of the cotton-planter and spindle-maker incorporated in the means of production. The higher wages draw a larger part of the working population into the more favoured sphere, until it is glutted with labour-power, and wages at length fall again to their average level or below it, if the pres- sure is too great. worked from 6 a. 400 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION ductive" employment of children under 14 years, in every in* dustry subject to the Factory Acts. 2 The system actually prevalent in England is, that the capitalist concentrates a large number of machines on his premises, and then distributes the produce of those machines for further mani- pulation amongst the domestic workers. +£90 var. Total weekly, 340 minutes. 1 The Tory* Cabinet announced in the Speech from the Throne, on February 5, 1867, that it had framed the proposals of the In- dustrial Commission of Inquiry 2 into Bills. . "The first and main object at which the new Land Act of 1862 aims is to give increased facilities for the settlement of the people." ("The Land Law of Victoria," by the Hon. Especially within the last twenty or thirty years, the evil has said to be of much less cost to the farmer" [himself very poor].... But the lion's share, which an inconceivably small number of land magnates in England, Scotland and Ireland swallow up of the yearly national rental, is so monstrous that the wisdom of the English State does not think fit to afford the same statistical materials about the distribution of rents as about the distribution of profits. 13.) "What if we have too much coin? It is one of the secrets of the conservation of the Ottoman Empire. The limit of this change is given by the altered value of labour-power. 344 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION through a series of processes step by step, like the wire in the manu- facture of needles, which passes through the hands of 72 and sometimes even 92 different detail workmen. The act of exchange gives to the commodity con- verted into money, not its value, but its specific value-form. 1 SECTION 2.— RELATIVE DIMINUTION OF THE VARIABLE PART OF CAPITAL SIMULTANEOUSLY WITH THE PROGRESS OF ACCUMULATION AND OF THE CONCENTRATION THAT ACCOMPANIES IT According to the economists themselves, it is neither the actual extent of social wealth, nor the magnitude of the capital already functioning, that lead to a rise of wages, but only the constant growth of accumulation and the degree of rapidity of that growth. The rise of wages therefore is confined within limits that not only leave in- tact the foundations of the capitalistic system, but also secure its reproduction on a progressive scale. It turned chiefly on the age of those who, under the name of children, were limited to 8 hours' work, and were subject to a certain amount of compulsory education. 99.) 152 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION movement. Never mind! Thus it came to pass that the former sort accumulated wealth, and the latter sort had at last nothing to sell except their own skins. 1 The least important commodities of all for the technological compari- son of different epochs of production are articles of luxury, in the strict mean- ing of the term. Engels, "Umrisse zu einer Kritik der Nationalokonomie," 1. It becomes the special social function of that commodity, and consequently its social monop- oly, to play within the world of commodities the part of the uni- versal equivalent. Both extremes have the same economic form. As with the division of labour in the interior of the manu- facturing workshops, so it is with the division of labour in the interior of society. On the other hand, the value and mass of the means of production set in motion by a given quantity of labour increase as the labour becomes more productive. I., p. Thus the linen acquires a value-form different from its physical form. —The workmen demand to be paid weekly instead of fortnightly, and by weight instead of by cubical contents of the tubs; they also demand protection against the use of false weights, &c. The reduction of the working-day to 12 hours dates in Eng- land from 1832. Though the capitalist have a hobby, and use a gold instead of a steel spindle, yet the only labour that counts for anything in the value of the yarn is that which would be required to produce a steel spindle, because no more is necessary under the given social conditions. are now stated upon the foot of a Price in money." ("An Essay upon Publick Credit." 3rd Ed. Lond., 1710, p. He repeated that prom- ise on the 23rd July last, but although since the date of the last promise there have been several cases of small-pox in his huts, and two deaths from the same disease, yet he has taken no steps whatever to carry out his promise. c, pp. 47, 49.) 308 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION transformable into capital. B. Like all other commodities, it was also capable of serving as an equivalent, either as simple equivalent in isolated exchanges, or as particular equivalent by the side of others. In the carding-room there has also been a great increase of labour. This system had grown up unto a regular trade. One of the essential conditions for the existence of the fac- tory system, especially when the length of the working-day is fixed, is certainty in the result, i.e., the production in a given time of a given quantity of commodities, or of a given useful effect. Most of the silver exported to China makes its way to India. Labour-time would, in that case, play a double part. II., p. If an invention is made by which it can be produced in 3 hours, the 1 "If you call labour a commodity, it is not like a commodity which is first produced in order to exchange, and then brought to market where it must exchange with other commodities according to the respective quantities of each which there may be in the market at the time; labour is created the moment it is brought to market; nay, it is brought to market before it is created." ("Observations on Certain Verbal Disputes, etc.," pp. 135.) THE GENERAL LAW OP CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 653 the industrial classes .... "In several parishes of Hertfordshire," writes one indignant person, "24 farms, numbering on the average 50-150 acres, have been melted up into three farms." 4 "In Northamptonshire and Leices- tershire the enclosure of common lands has taken place on a very large scale, and most of the new lordships, resulting from the en- closure, have been turned into pasturage, in consequence of which many lordships have not now 50 acres ploughed yearly, in which 1,500 were ploughed formerly. SECTION 3.— THE TWO FUNDAMENTAL FORMS OF MANUFACTURE: HETEROGENEOUS MANUFACTURE, SERIAL MANUFACTURE The organisation of manufacture has two fundamental forms which, in spite of occasional blending, are essentially different in kind, and, moreover, play very distinct parts in the subsequent transformation of manufacture into modern industry carried on by machinery. A piece of ribbon for making which the weaver got 6s. c, pp. To fix its price, it suffices to equate it to gold in imagination. Daire t. In a society whose pivot, to use an expression of Fourier, was agriculture on a small scale, with its subsidiary domestic industries, and the urban handicrafts, the means of communication and transport were so utterly inadequate to the productive requirements of the manufacturing period, with its extended division of social labour, its concentration of the instruments of labour, and o£ the workmen, and its colonial markets, that they became in fact revolutionised. Simonde (i. The same change in productive power, which increases the fruitfulness of labour, and, in consequence, the quantity of use-values produced by that labour, will diminish the total value of this increased quantity of use-values, provided such change shorten the total labour-time necessary for their production; and vice versa. On the same supposition as before, therefore, there are further 788,761 persons to emigrate; total, 1,709,532. c, p. The capitalist mode of production, while on the one hand, enforcing economy in each individual business, on the oth- er hand, begets, by its anarchical system of competition, the most outrageous squandering of labour-power and of the social means of production, not to mention the creation of a vast number of employ- ments, at present indispensable, but in themselves superfluous. This aspect, from the standpoint of use-value alone, is taken as well by Plato, 4 who treats division of labour as the foundation on which the division of society into classes is based, as by 1 Amongst the moderns may be excepted a few writers of the 18th century, like Beccaria and James Harris, who with regard to division of labour almost entirely follow the ancients. This is owing to the fact, first, that the cap- ital which is exchanged for labour-power is itself but a portion of the product of others' labour appropriated without an equivalent; and, secondly, that this capital must not only be replaced by its producer, but replaced together with an added surplus. The master shall feed his slave on bread and water, weak broth and such refuse meat as he thinks fit. Note. Bailey, the author of this anonymous work, a work which in its day created much stir in England, fancied that, by thus pointing out the various relative expressions of one and the same value, he had proved the impossibility of any determination of the. This applies still more to diamonds. 331.) Our "proletarian" is economically none other than the wage-labourer who produces and increases capital, and is thrown out on the streets, as soon as he is superfluous tor the needs of aggrandisement of "Monsieur capi- tal," as Pecqueur calls this person "The sickly proletarian of the primitive forest," is a pretty Roscherian tancy The primitive forester is owner of the primitive forest, and uses the primitive forest as his property with 'the freedom ol an orang-outang He is not, therefore, a proletarian. This, in passing into its new shape, incor- porates gratis the social advance made while its old shape was being used up. On the other hand, to the same extent as the system of credit is extended, so is the function of money as a means of payment. 2 We cull here a few character- istic passages, in which the proprietary rights of capital over labour-power are unblushingly asserted. c, pp. While they got the same wages and gained one hour of spare time, the capitalist got the same amount produced and saved the cost of coal, gas, and other such 1 See "Rep. The confusion caused by attributing a hidden meaning to these cabalistic signs is all the greater, because these money-names express both the values of commodities, and, at the same time, aliquot parts of the weight of the metal that is 1 "Le monete le quali oggi sono ideali sono le piu antiche d'ogni na- zione, e tutte furono un tempo reali, e perche erano reali con esse si con tava." (Galiani: Delia moneta, 1. Secondly, this division of labour is a particular sort of co- operation, and many of its disadvantages spring from the general character of co-operation, and not from this particular form of it. 423.) 576 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION capital and enrichment I advise a loan (of five or six millions sterling), . The real value of a commodity is, however, not its individual value, but its social value; that is to say, the real value is not measured by the labour-time that the article in each individual case costs the producer, but by the labour-time socially required for its production. Tools of the same kind, such as knives, drills, gimlets, hammers, &c, may be employed in different processes; and the same tool may serve va- rious purposes in a single process. Here it is not the piece of money that changes its place twice, but the com- modity. 2 Reports, &c, 30th April, 1858, p. We must confess that we do not think it 'worth while,' or even possible, to keep the human ma- chinery in order — that is to shut it up and keep it oiled till it is wanted. Justices of the peace, on information, are to hunt the rascals down. 324 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION in individual cases. e., his mode of production, and the labour-process itself, must be revolutionised. In the earliest period of human history domesticated animals, i.e., animals which have been bred for the purpose, and have undergone modi- fications by means of labour, play the chief part as instruments of labour along with specially prepared stones, wood, bones, and shells. Apart then from all accumulation, the mere continuity of the process of production, in other words simple reproduction, sooner or later, and of necessity, converts every capital into accumulated capital, or capitalised surplus-value. The employes themselves fixed the price and plundered at will the unhappy Hindus. A disease of the skin, no doubt from the irritation of the dirt contained in the Surat cotton, also prevails.... At first, the use of steam power meets with mere technical difficul- ties, such as unsteadiness in the machines, difficulty in controlling their speed, rapid wear and tear of the lighter machines, &c, all of which are soon overcome by experience. The following is an example which is of very frequent occurrence: — One fireman commenced work on the Monday morning at a very early hour. The whole body is paralysed if but one of its members be wanting. V. These raw materials and means of subsistence have now become commodities; the large farmer sells them, he finds his market in manufactures. All these are hereby thrown out of their livings with their families 1 Eden, 1. For all that, the French revolutionary method has its special advan- tages. Here, however, a task is set us, the perform- ance of which has never yet even been attempted by bourgeois economy, the task of tracing the genesis of this money-form, of same time the normal activity of living beings. Toutesces causes le ruinent insensiblement, et il se trouverait hors d'etat de payer les impdts directs a l'ech6ance sans la filerie; elle lui offre une ressource, en occupant utilement sa femme, ses en- fants, ses servants, ses valets, et lui-meme; mais quelle penible vie, merae aidee de ce secours. In those industries where the Factory Act proper (not the Print Works Act referred to in the text) has been in force for some time, tn,e obstacles in the way of the education clauses have, in recent years, been overcome. In this position it is a thing in which we see nothing but value, or whose palpable bodily form represents value. But when viewed in their qualitative aspect alone, £110 are the same as £100, namely money; and considered quan- titatively, £110 is, like £100, a sum of definite and limited value. 2 "The Acts of last Session (1864) ... "In some parts of Scotland this trade [before the introduction of the Factory Act in 1862] was carried on by a system of over-time, i.e., ten hours a day were the regular hours of work, for which a nominal wage of Is. 2d. as soon as it rises to 15 hours. These things are very difficult to be brought about; but they are not impracticable, since they have been effected 1 J. GENESIS OP THE INDUSTRIAL CAPITALIST 755 in industry or even in usury. Only the working-time which is embodied in a quantum of commodities determined beforehand and experimental- ly fixed, counts as socially necessary working-time, and is paid as such. 1864, pp. There we meet with the fol- lowing derivative formulae. . It will be self-un- derstood that every sanitary measure, which, as has been the case hitherto in London, hunts the labourers from one quarter, by demolishing uninhabitable houses, serves only to crowd them together yet more closely in another. With its accumulation, therefore, there kept pace, on the whole, a corresponding growth in the demand for labour. We have already alluded to the physical deterioration as well of the children and young persons as of the woman, whom machinery, first directly in the factories that shoot up on its basis, and then indirectly in all the remaining branches of in- dustry, subjects to the exploitation of capital. On this assumption we have seen that the relative magnitudes of surplus-value and of price of labour-power are determined by three circumstances; (1) the length of the working-day, or the extensive magnitude of labour; (2) the normal intensity of labour, its intensive magnitude, whereby a given quantity of labour is expended in a given time; (3) the productiveness of labour, whereby the same quantum of labour yields, in a given time, a greater or less quantum of product, dependent on the degree of 1 Note in the 3rd German edition.— -The case considered at pages 316- 319 is here of course omitted. — F E. Economistes financiers. The reduction in wage seems to have been carried to a greater extent than is necessary for increasing demand. The ever repeated purchase and sale of labour-power is now the mere form; what really takes place is this — the capital- ist again and again appropriates, without equivalent, a portion of the previously materialised labour of others, and exchanges it for a greater quantity of living labour. »> » » »> >» » £95,844,222 57,028,289 36,415,225 22,809,781 8,744,762 308,416 23,334 3,619 832 91 105,435,738 64,554,297 42,535,576 27,555,313 11,077,238 332,431 24,265 4,021 973 107 In 1855 there were produced in the United Kingdom 61,453,079 tons of coal, of value £16,113,167; in 1864, 92,787,873 tons, of value £23,197,968; in 1855, 3,218,154 tons of pig-iron, of value £8,045,385; 1864, 4,767,951 tons, of value £11,919,877. Dr. Simon, medical officer of the Privy Council, in his official Report says: "In apology for the wretched house- hold accommodation ... Its origin is supposed to be explained when it is told as an anecdote of the past. But hand-in-hand with the increasing productivity of labour, goes, as we have seen, the cheap- ening of the labourer, therefore a higher rate of surplus-value, even when the real wages are rising. 50, 100, &c, continually dimin- ishes. Le terme d'addition peint tres-bien la maniere dont se forme le prix des ouvrages de main-d'oeuvre; ce prix n'est qu'un total de plusieurs valeurs consommees et additionnees ensemble; or, additionner n'est pas multiplier." ("Mercier de la Riviere," 1. The Royal Commission appointed in 1867 to inquire into the employment in agriculture of children, young persons, and women, has published some very important reports. 1 The reader who is imbued with capitalist notions will naturally miss here the "interest" that the machine, in proportion to its capital value, adds to the product. 550 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION bakers is the cause of the difficulty in getting rid of night-work. m. Rh. Z No. 266, April 7, 1849.) 4 E. As they [the poor] ought to be kept from starving, so they should receive nothing worth saving. "I am a Christian." "Thou liest," thundered back the great Judge, "thou art nought but a Ciceronian." 104 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION generally the way in which real contradictions are reconciled. Thereby the bodily form of this commodity becomes the form of the socially recognised universal equivalent. What is lost by the detail labourers, is con- centrated in the capital that employs them. 1735.) "Still it is injurious to their morality, you think?" "Not so much as working on the pit bank; but it is more on the social position I take it; I do not take it on its moral ground alone. 184.) 166 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION from circulation. He not only effects a change of form in the material on which he works, but he also realises a purpose of his own that gives the law to his modus operandi, and to which he must subordinate his will. l I assume (1) that commodities are sold at their value; (2) that the price of labour-power rises occasionally above its value, but never sinks below it. We begin to understand what becomes of the immense quantities of goods conjured up by the magic of machinery, and of the enormous masses of workpeople, which that machinery sets free. Experimenta in corpore vili, like those of anatomists on frogs, were formally made. The first description is applicable to every possible employment of machinery on a large scale, the second is characteristic of its use by capital, and therefore of the modern factory system. We know that, with transitory exceptions, a change in the productiveness of labour does not cause any change in the value of labour-power, nor consequently in the magnitude of surplus- value, unless the products of the industries affected are articles habitually consumed by the labourers. Calculated at this rate, the resources of the family would amount, at the maximum, to 1,068 francs a-year ... This exploitation existed always to a certain extent among peasants, and was the more developed, the heavier the yoke pressing on the husbandman. I can, therefore, express the same rela- tionship by saying, e.g., that the labourer in every minute works 30 seconds for himself, and 30 for the capitalist, etc. But it was seen from the evidence that, by due care and previous arrangement, the apprehended difficulty would be got over; and accordingly, by clause 6 of section 6 of the Factory Acts Extension Act, passed during this Session of Parliament, an interval of eighteen months is given to them from the passing of the Act before they are required to conform to the meal hours, specified by the Factory Acts." 3 Hardly had the Act been passed when our friends the manufacturers found out: "The inconveni- ences we expected to arise from the introduction of the Factory Acts into our branch of manufacture, I am happy to say, have not aris- 1 "Report of Insp. Bastiat." THE LABOUR-PROCESS 193 man, and exclaims: "Have I myself not worked? above 18) THE GENERAL LAW OP CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 663 Company, were for the most part inhabited by well-paid labourers. 3 It is moreover now the personal interest of the labourer to lengthen the working-day, since with it his daily or weekly wages rise. On their heels treads the commercial war of the European nations, with the globe for a theatre. They flow in from Japan, from the most remote States of South Ameri- ca, and from the Canary Islands. Hence its Fetish character is comparatively easy to be seen through. Report, p. Neverthe- less, about 15 years ago, a machine was invented that automati- cally performed 6 separate operations at once. It was allowed to use these notes for discounting bills, making advances on commodities, and for buying the precious metals. of pressed glass. 2 "Ch. Empl. Under the conditions assumed in I. Considering the social capital in its totality, the movement of its accumulation now causes periodical changes, affecting it more or less as a whole, now distributes its various phases simul- taneously over the different spheres of production. 4 1 Ure: "French translation, Philosophie des Manufactures." Paris, 1836, Vol. 3 I. No society can go on producing, in other words, no society can re- produce, unless it constantly reconverts a part of its products into means of production, or elements of fresh products. 8d., for a woman, Is. 8d., for a boy, Is. 2-^- d. Changes in the methods of production by the subordination of labour to capital, can take place only at a later period, and therefore will have to be treated of in a later chapter. 582 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION for the moment, whether the additional capital is joined on to the original capital, or is separated from it to function independently; whether the same capitalist, who accumulated it, employs it, or whether he hands it over to another. 2 2 " 4. At my asking for an explanation of this from a manufacturer, he gave me the following: 'Under the old system I employed 63 persons; after the introduction of im- proved machinery I reduced my hands to 33, and lately, in consequence of new and extensive alterations. The landholders in most parishes that have been enclosed only 15 or 20 years, are very few in comparison of the numbers who occupied them in their open- field state. Political Economy values this fact so highly, that it occasionally identifies the acceleration of accumulation due to increased pro- ductiveness of labour, with its acceleration due to increased exploitation of the labourer. What alone interests him, is the surplus-value that dwells in it, and is realisable by sale. Such an employ- ment of refuse may be seen in the large machine works at Manches- ter, where mountains of iron turnings are carted away to the found- ry in the evening, in order the next morning to re-appear in the workshops as solid masses of iron. The total num- ber of civil engineers amounted to 3,329. Just as the individual machine retains a dwarfish character, so long as it is worked by the power of man alone, and just as no system of machinery could be properly developed before the steam-engine took the place of the earlier motive powers, animals, wind, and even water; so, too, Modern Industry was crippled in its complete development, so long as its characteristic instrument of production, the machine, owed its existence to personal strength and personal skill, and depended on the muscular development, the keenness of sight, and the cunning of hand, with which the detail workmen in manufactures, and the manual labourers in handicrafts, wielded their dwarfish imple- ments. qui s'etablit dans la plupart des manufactures et des ateliers." (Skarbek, 1. improvements succeeded each oth- er so rapidly, that machines which had never been finished were abandoned in the hands of their makers, because new improvements had superseded their utility." (Babbage, I.e., p. . Says Mirabeau: "We are only paying attention to the grand manufactories, in which hundreds of men work under a director and which are commonly called manufactures reunies. Cyrop. Such an idea could only spring up in a bourgeois society already well developed. 2 It is one of the chief failings of classical economy that it has never succeeded, by means of its analysis of commodities, and, in particular, of COMMODITIES 81 bear it stamped upon them in unmistakeable letters that they belong to a state of society, in which the process of production has the mastery over man, instead of being controlled by him, such formulae appear to the bourgeois intellect to be as much a self-evident necessity imposed by Nature as productive labour itself. If they are wanting in docility he can use force; in other words, he can take possession of them. 2 Martin Luther calls these kinds of institutions: "The Company Mo- nopolia." 310 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION others, as a pumper-out of surplus-labour and exploiter of labour- power, it surpasses in energy, disregard of bounds, recklessness and efficiency, all earlier systems of production based on directly compulsory labour. indeed the English seem to have set, in good earnest, about en- couraging manufactures and employing the poor. That the natural increase of the number of labourers does not satisfy the requirements of the accumulation of capital, and yet all the time is in excess of them, is a contradic- tion inherent to the movement of capital itself. Edit.: Lond. Simply by opposing to weaving that other particular form of concrete labour (in this instance tailoring), which produces the equivalent of the product of weaving. P. . m. Blakey: "The History of Political Literature from the Earliest Times." Lond., 1855, Vol. It will, therefore, be useful, for a clear comprehension of the relation of the parties, to assume provisionally, that the possessor of labour-power, on the occasion of each sale, immediately receives the price stip- ulated to be paid for it. What this, you gods? . But in order that our owner of money may be able to find labour-power offered for sale as a commodity, various conditions 1 "In the form of money ... First, the labourer works under the control of the 1 By a wonderful feat of logical acumen, Colonel Torrens has discov- ered, in this stone of the savage the origin of capital. 538 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION recognised that the change in the relations of demand and supply explained in regard to the price of labour, as of all other commodi- ties, nothing except its changes, i.e., the oscillations of the market- price above or below a certain mean. 20.) After enumerating the different provisions of these Acts, and the complications arising from them, Mr. Baker says: "It will hence appear that it must be very difficult to secure the execution of these three Acts of Parliament where the occupier chooses to evade the law." But what is assured to the lawyers by this is law-suits. There were two conditions to which an employment must be subject to cause it to be inspected, viz., the use of steam or water-power, and the manufacture of certain specified fibres." (Reports, &c, for 31st October, 1864, p. 1 In every country in which the capitalist mode of production reigns, it is the custom not to pay for labour-power before it has been exercised for the period fixed by the contract, as for example, the end of each week. Bright's partners had introduced new machinery which would turn out 240 yards of carpet in the time and with the labour (!) previously required to produce 160 yards. A long stick served as prop to prevent the chimney from falling. But it forms at the same time a self-reproducing and self- perpetuating element of the working-class, taking a proportionally greater part in the general increase of that class than the other elements. c, p. After making allowance, both in the case of the machine and of the tool, for their average daily cost, that is for the value they transmit to the product by their average daily wear and tear, and for their consumption of auxiliary substances, such as oil, coal, and so on, they each do their work gratuitously, just like the forces fur- nished by Nature without the help of man.The greater the produc- tive power of the machinery compared with that of the tool, the greater is the extent of its gratuitous service compared with that of the tool. Except as personified capital, the capitalist has no historical value, and no right to that historical existence, which, to use an expression of the witty Lichnowsky, "hasn't got no date." And so far only is the necessity for his own transitory existence implied in the transitory necessity for the capitalist mode of production. Hence their definition of a productive labourer changes with their com- prehension of the nature of surplus-value. By means of its conversion into an automaton, the instrument of labour confronts the labourer, during the labour-process, in the shape of capital, of dead labour, that dominates, and pumps dry, living labour-power. The ruins of former dwelling-houses, barns, stables, &c," are the sole traces of the former inhabitants. Modern Industry had therefore itself to take in hand the machine, its characteristic instrument of production, and to construct machines by machines. Hence a lessened demand for those commodi- ties— voila tout. It is the surplus alone that becomes a commodity, and a portion of even that, not until it has reached the hands of the State, into whose hands from time immemorial a certain quan- tity of these products has found its way in the shape of rent in kind. -. 1 Especially in the original form of the power-loom, we recognise, at the first glance, the ancient loom. 66. extended the laws against coali- tions of labourers to manufactures. . But just as a man requires lungs to breathe with, so he requires something that is work of man's hand, in order to con- sume physical forces productively. You must lay down a general rule? 3 The use and fabrication of instruments of labour, al- though existing in the germ among certain species of animals, is specifically characteristic of the human labour-process, and Frank- lin therefore defines man as a tool-making animal. A born leveller and a cynic, it is always ready to exchange not only soul, but body, with any and every other commodity, be the same more repulsive than Maritor- nes herself. How important is this element in the formation of the relative surplus-population, is shown by the example of 1 Even in the cotton famine of 1863 we find, in a pamphlet of the oper- ative cotton-spinners of Blackburn, fierce denunciations of over-work, which, in consequence of the Factory Acts, of course only affected adult male labour- ers. 2 "Reasons for the Late Increase of the Poor-Rates: or a comparative view of the prices of labour and provisions." Lond., 1777, pp. Shortly afterwards, however, a worse kind of competition sprang up, namely, that of underselling one an- other in the market. 875,782 . On the other hand, Don Quixote long ago paid the penalty for wrongly imagining that knight errantry was compatible with all economic forms of society. . The branches that we are now about to examine, sole- ly with regard to those of the workpeople who work at home, and not those who work in manufactories or warehouses fall into two divisions, viz. The mining industry allows the latter some choice. They had entered upon the contest for the repeal of the Corn Laws, and needed the workers to help them to victory. c, p. of Fact., 31st Oct., 1863," p. It is the natural property of living labour, to transmit old value, whilst it creates new. 2 He himself, ten years later, cites his opinion of 1845 in proof of how much he under-estimat- ed in that year the elasticity of machinery, and of man's labour- power, both of which are simultaneously stretched to an extreme by the compulsory shortening of the working-day. 34. When one commodity, such as a coat, serves as the equivalent of another, such as linen, and coats consequently acquire the characteristic property of being directly exchangeable with linen, we are far from knowing in what proportion the two are ex- changeable. Centralisation completes the work of accumulation by ena- bling industrial capitalists to extend the scale of their operations. SECTION 3.— PROGRESSIVE PRODUCTION OF A RELATIVE SURPLUS-POPULATION OR INDUSTRIAL RESERVE ARMY The accumulation of capital, though originally appearing as its quantitative extension only, is effected, as we have seen, under a progressive qualitative change in its composition, THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 629 under a constant increase of its constant, at the expense of its variable constituent. Another, and a still more powerful instrument is emigration. refer especially to the labour- ers in coal mines. . In what country, except North America and some new colonies, do the wages of free labour employed in agriculture, much exceed a bare subsistence for the labourer? But so soon as he completes the process, so soon as he supplements his sale by a purchase, the money again leaves the hands of its possessor. 2 Instances: The Army Clothing Depot at Pimlico, London, the Shirt factory of Tillie and Henderson at Londonderry, and the clothes factory of Messrs- Tait at Limerick which employs about 1,200 hands. 4,392, 176 yds. 804-805). 36.) 4 "La conservation d'un capital exige ... In like manner the partial product of the next 2 period of 1 hour and 36 minutes, is 2 -5- lbs. 916.) "The mines which are continually giving gold and silver, do give sufficient to supply such a needful balance to every nation." (J. [Added in the 4th German edition. Sir Robert Peel, by his Bank Act of 1844. It has never occurred to the vulgar economist to make the simple reflexion, that every human action may be viewed, as "ab- stinence" from its opposite. Bron- chitis is more prevalent owing to the dust. This accel- erated relative diminution of the variable constituent, that goes along with the accelerated increase of the total capital, and moves more rapidly than this increase, takes the inverse form, at the other pole, of an apparently absolute increase of the labouring population, an increase always moving more rapidly than that of the variable capital or the means of employment. (n. The labour-time necessary in each partial process, for attaining the desired effect, is learnt by experience, and the mech- anism of Manufacture, as a whole, is based on the assumption that a given result will be obtained in a given time. "The extension of the railway system throughout the country has tended very much to encourage giving short notice. 1 As regards the means of production, what is really consumed is their use-value, and the consumption of this use-value by labour results in the product. . ("On the Economy of Machinery," pp. THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 677 The repeal of the Corn Laws gave a marvellous impulse to English agriculture. He says, "in case of need," the workmen can be moved at the will of the manager from one machine to another, and he triumphantly exclaims: "Such a change is in flat contradiction with the old routine, that divides the labour, and to one workman assigns the task of fashioning the head of a needle, to another the sharpening of the point." He had much better have asked himself, why this "old routine" is departed from in the automatic factory, only "in case of need." 2 When distress is very great, as, for instance, during the American Civil War, the factory operative is now and then set by the Bourgeois to do the roughest of work, such as road-making, &c. But in return, his unpaid forced labour for the lord, on its side, never acquires the character of voluntary paid labour. The more extensive, finally, the lazarus-layers of the working- class, and the industrial reserve army, the greater is official pauperism. Comm. To-day, the first Utopia is a Factory Act, the second figures as an official phrase in all Factory Acts, the third is already being used as a cloak for reactionary humbug. "The second period, when they had begun to acquire little fortunes, but worked as hard as before," — for direct exploitation of labour costs labour, as every slave-driver knows — "and lived in as plain a manner as before. l (2.) Manufacture also arises in a way exactly the reverse of this— namely, by one capitalist employing simultaneously in one workshop a number of artificers, who all do the same, or the same kind of work, such as making paper, type, or needles. If some masters were not so greedy, the boys would not work late; an extra machine costs only £\6 or £18; much of such over- time as does occur is to be referred to an insufficiency of appliances, and a want of space." "Ch. Empl. m. It is under the form of money that value begins and ends, and begins again, every act of its own spontaneous generation. The wage of the machine hands rises compared with that of the house-workers, many of whom belong to the poorest of the poor. " 4 Up to that time it was supposed, that the children were decimated by malaria, and other diseases peculiar to low-lying and marshy districts. They must have hands ready by them, they must be able to increase the activity of their operations when required, and to slacken it again, according to the state of the market, or they cannot possibly maintain that pre-eminence in the race of competition on which the wealth of the country is founded." 1 Even Malthus recognises over-population as a neces- sity of modern industry, though, after his narrow fashion, he explains it by the absolute over-growth of the labouring pop- ulation, not by their becoming relatively supernumerary. As the working-day, so, too, the working year, may be conceived to consist of ll 1 / 2 hours or 23 half-hours, but each multiplied by the number of working-days in the year. 16.) 1 "The principle of the factory system, then, is to substitute ... The exiles transplanted to the United States, send home sums of money every year as travelling expenses for those left behind. 958,265 22,301 men \ 12,379 women / 13,803 Agriculture in England & Wales London tailors . On the other hand, this fact is a new lever in economising the means of payment. Brief von Rodbertus.) To such ideo- logical commonplaces did the bold attack by Rodbertus in his "social let- ters" finally dwindle down.—/ 1 . Nevertheless, even in this case, the increased production of surplus-value arises from the curtailment of the necessary labour- 318 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION time, and from the corresponding prolongation of the surplus-la- bour. The doctor, Mr. Keys, called too late to the death-bed, du- ly bore witness before the coroner's jury that "Mary Anne Walk- ley had died from long hours of work in an over-crowded work- room, and a too small and badly-ventilated bedroom." In or- der to give the doctor a lesson in good manners, the coroner's jury thereupon brought in a verdict that "the deceased had died of apoplexy, but there was reason to fear that her death had been accelerated by over- work in an over-crowded workroom, &c." "Our white slaves," cried the Morning Star, the organ of the Free- traders, Gobden and Bright, "our white slaves, who are toiled in- to the grave, for the most part silently pine and die." * "It is not in dressmakers' rooms that working to death is the order of the day, but in a thousand other places; in every place I had almost said, where 4 a thriving business' has to be milliners, dressmakers, and ordinary sempstresses, there are three miseries — over-work, deficient air, and either deficient food or deficient digestion.... x Nevertheless the position of this detail labourer who, though he works at home, does so for a capitalist (manufacturer, etablisseur), is very differ- ent from that of the independent artificer, who works for his own customers. 1865.-445,947,600 lbs. For instance, suppose a cloth manufac- turer converts £2,000 into capital. If in one hour l4 lbs. Verri, 1. of yarn produced, it follows that the various component parts of this value, can be represented as being contained respectively in corresponding parts of the product. In its specific capitalist form — and under the given conditions, it could take no other form than a capitalistic one— manufacture is but a particular method of begetting relative surplus-value, or of augmenting at the ex- pense of the labourer the self-expansion of capital— usually called social wealth, "Wealth of Nations," &c. j/yy/ 6 hours necessary labour - Variable Capital of 3 sh. It also acts as a stimulus upon the organs of sight, and by this means brings about more activity in the various cerebral functions." Dr. W. To be able to read and write was for every one of them a requirement of their trade. The same fate would have overtaken them in the commercial crisis that was staved off only by the cotton famine. 109.) 3 See amongst others, John Houghton: "Husbandry and Trade Im- proved." London, 1727. 2 Use-values become a reality only by use or consumption: they also constitute the substance of all wealth, whatever may be the social form of that wealth. c, pp. 3 1 Karl Marx. But this is a mere quantitative difference, which for the present does not concern us. "Ne sutor ultra crepi- dam" — this nee plus ultra of handicraft wisdom became sheer nonsense, from the moment the watchmaker Watt invented the steam-engine, the barber Arkwright, the throstle, and the working- jeweller, Fulton, the steamship. can anything be worse for landowners or masters than parting with the best of the workers, and demoralising and disappointing the rest by an extended depletive emigration, a depletion of capi- tal and value in an entire province?" Potter, the chosen mouthpiece of the manufacturers, distin- guishes two sorts of "machinery," each of which belongs to the capitalist, and of which one stands in his factory, the other at night-time and on Sundays is housed outside the factory, in cot- tages. In order that the mass of money, actually current, may constantly saturate the absorbing power of the circulation, it is necessary that the quantity of gold and silver in a country be greater than the quan- tity required to function as coin. * (2.) Lengthening of the working-day. Wages are much lower than in England, in many cases 50%, but the number of hands in proportion to the machinery was much greater, in certain depart- ments in the proportion of 5 : 3— Mr. Redgrave gives very full de- tails as to the Russian cotton factories. The occupier is to hang up a "legible" printed notice stating the hours for the beginning and ending of work and the times allowed for the several meals. 4 The capitalist then takes his stand on the law of the ex- change of commodities. 140-141. Finally, 450,000 working-class families =2,250,000 persons, of whom the model ones enjoy the happiness depicted by Ducpetiaux. 5 "It is sometimes advanced by way of excuse, when persons are found at work in a factory, either at a meal hour, or at some illegal time, that they will not leave the mill at the appointed hour, and that compulsion is necessary to force them to cease work [cleaning their machinery, &c], especially on Saturday afternoons. Comm. (See Repts., Insp. 32.) The author of this anonymous work: G. 1 (t>.) The Badly Paid Strata of the British Industrial Class During the cotton famine of 1862, Dr. Smith was charged by the Privy Council with an inquiry into the conditions of nourishment of the distressed operatives in Lancashire and Che- shire. lii, and ib. Those boys who work in the day sets must take their turn in the night sets also, be- cause the men could not work in the night sets only; it would ruin their health We think, however, that night-work in alternate weeks is no harm. . THE WORKING-DAY 267 Mutato nomine de te fabula narratur. The number of the men condemned to work in coal and metal mines increased enormously owing to the progress of the English factory system; but during the last few decades this in- crease of number has been less rapid, owing to the use of new ma- chinery in mining. The rise in the price of cotton during a period of feverish activity, had induced the manufacturers in Blackburn to shorten, by mutual consent, the working-time in their mills during a cer- tain fixed period. 137, n. From the destruction of those Freeholders. per day was paid to a man, there being every day over-time for three or four hours, paid at the rate of 3d. "This can be account- ed for by the simple fact that, with only being at school for one half of the day, they are always fresh, and nearly always ready and willing to receive instruction. As a matter of fact the apologists do not mean this sort of setting free. But this, on the one hand, does not prevent 200 ounces of gold from still containing more value than 100 ounces, nor, on the other hand, does it hinder the actual metallic form of this article from continuing to be the universal equiva- lent form of all other commodities, and the immediate social incarnation of all human labour. 8 I give below the translation of this poem by Stolberg, because it brings Into relief, quite in the spirit of former quotations referring to division of labour, the antithesis between the views of the ancients and the moderns. "As the old irregular system prevails in neighbouring works, the Messrs. . 2074 in "Royal Commission on Railways, Minutes," 1867.) 562 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION AVERAGE NUMBER OF SPINDLES PER FACTORY. The labourer employs more than one half of his working-day in producing the surplus-value, which different persons, under different pretexts, share amongst themselves. "Open villages," those whose soil belongs to many smaller landlords. 78. MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 417 cry, constantly on the increase. The struggle between these cottage factories and the factory proper, lasted over 12 years. of Insp. 3, pp 166, 165, Edinburgh, 1791-93.) Parson Thomas Chalmers has his suspicions as to Adam Smith having invented the category of "unproductive labourers," solely for the Protestant parsons, in spite of their blessed work in the vineyard of the' Lord. If on the one hand the coat ranks as nothing but the embodiment of abstract human labour, so, on the other hand, the tailoring which is actually embodied in it, counts as nothing but the form under which that abstract labour is realised. 4 I. 47). So we find working-days of 8, 10, 12, 14, 16, 18 hours, i.e., of the most different lengths. A variation in the productiveness of labour, its increase or diminution, causes a variation in the opposite direction in the value of labour-power, and in the same direction in surplus-value. If it happens that a vagabond has been idling about for three days, he is to be taken to his birthplace, branded with a redhot iron with the letter V on the breast and be set to work, in chains, in the streets or at some other labour. These periods have been divided, to correspond with the ma- terials from which their implements and weapons were made, viz., into the stone, the bronze, and the iron ages. To say that these two independ- ent and antithetical acts have an intrinsic unity, are essentially one, is the same as to say that this intrinsic oneness expresses itself in an external antithesis. For the latter, the cost of appren- ticeship vanishes; for the former, it diminishes, compared with that of artificers, in consequence of the functions being simplified. The law of the determination of value by la- bour-time, a law which brings under its sway the individual capi- talist who applies the new method of production, by compelling him to sell his goods under their social value, this same law, acting as a coercive law of competition, forces his competitors to adopt the new method. 2 T. 274.) 362 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION the parts of which are men." 1 As a matter of fact, some few man- ufacturers in the middle of the 18th century preferred, for cer- tain operations that were trade secrets, to employ half-idiotic persons. 1846.-21,789,346 lbs. LXVI1I., n. These thousands are now breaking in upon the other quarters; always half-starv- ing, they cry their misery in our ears, they cry to Heaven, they tell us from their miserable dwellings, that it is impossible for them to find work, and useless for them to beg. .... The equality of these two sums is therefore self-evident. Every accumulation becomes the means of new accumulation. The gap which emigration causes here, limits not only the local demand for labour, but also the incomes of small shopkeepers, artisans, tradespeople generally. To the latter, there- fore, the relations connecting the labour of one individual with that of the rest appear, not as direct social relations between individuals at work, but as what they really are, material rela- tions between persons and social relations between things. In many of the manufacturing districts, but par- ticularly, I am afraid, in the guilty county to which I belong [Lancashire], cruelties the most heart-rending were practised upon the unoffending and friendless creatures who were thus con- signed to the charge of master-manufacturers; they were harassed to the brink of death by excess of labour . 1073.) And yet they are not satisfied! VI. When this event happens the spinner will not be paid at the same rate for work done as he was before, but as that rate will not be diminished in the ratio of one-fifth, the improvement will augment his money earnings for any given number of hours' work," but "the foregoing statement requires a cer- tain modification.... und schlafet Sanft! es verkiinde der Hahn euch den Morgen umsonst! Dao hat die Arbeit der Madchen den Nymphen befohlen, Und itzt hiipfen sie leicht iiber die Rader dahin, DaB die erschutterten Achsen mit ihren Speichen sich walzen, Und im Kreise die Last drehen des walzenden Steins. This co-operation begins only with the labour-process, but they have then ceased to belong to themselves. Hence, the guild organisation, however much it may have contributed by separating, isolating, and perfecting the handicrafts, to create the material conditions for the existence of manufacture, excluded division of labour in the workshop. When I have heard such inconsiderate remarks made, I have usually put this question: Suppose you were in want of an addi- tional workman, and two were to apply, both equally well qualified In other respects, but one had lost a thumb or a forefinger, which would you engage? There we were chiefly concerned with the social functioning of the labourer. REACTION OF THE AGRICULTURAL REVOLUTION 749 population, and completes the separation between agriculture and rural domestic industry, whose roots — spinning and weav- ing—it tears up. It is the first change experienced by the actual labour- process, when subjected to capital. The Venetian monk Ortes, one of the great economic writers of the 18th century, regards the antagonism of capitalist produc- tion as a general natural law of social wealth. "The rooms are generally the ordinary living rooms of small cot- tages, the chimney stopped up to keep out draughts, the inmates kept warm by their own animal heat alone, and this frequently in winter. 1 When the present Duchess of Sutherland entertained Mrs. And that is — human labour. Reflection and fancy are subject to err; but a habit of moving the hand or the foot is independent of either. It is clear that, whether a man buys his house ready built, or gets it built for him, in neither case will the mode of acquisition increase the amount of money laid out on the house. . Every augmentation, therefore, in the national stock destined for reproduction, comes, in the progress of society, to have less and less influence upon the condtition of the labourer." (Ramsay, 1. 2 Given piece-wage, it is naturally the personal interest of the labourer to strain his labour-power as intensely as possible; this enables the capitalist to raise more easily the normal degree of intensity of labour. I. m. When we know that a given value is sur- plus-value, we know how its owner came by it; but that does not alter the nature either of value or of money. The exodus of the next 20 years, an exodus still constantly increasing, did not, as, e.g., the Thir- ty Years' War, decimate, along with the human beings, their means of production. . 175. The use-value of labour-power, or in other words, labour, belongs just as little to its seller, as the use-value of oil after it has been sold belongs to the dealer who has sold it. 2 L. Secondly, with regard to that which forms the ground-work for the quantitative determination of value, namely, the duration of that expenditure, or the quantity of labour, it is quite clear that there is a palpable difference between its quantity and quality. The very improvement of the machinery demands to a certain extent "improved construction of the buildings," and this is an advantage to the workpeople. m. of Fact, for 31st October, 1862," p. Lond., 1805, V. DEGREE OF EXPLOITATION OF LABOUR-POWER. This gratuitous service of past labour, when seized and filled with a soul by living labour, increases with the advancing stages of accumulation. * Of course this does not alter the general relations between capital and wage-labour. 13.) THE WORKING-DAY 237 er it be called corvee or wage-labour. In the Eng- lish letter-press printing trade, for example, there existed formerly a system, corresponding to that in the old manufactures and handicrafts, of advancing the apprentices from easy to more and more difficult work. It compels him to keep constantly extend- ing his capital, in order to preserve it, but extend it he cannot, except by means of progressive accumulation. 62-63.) 420 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION an autocrat. If their natural endowments are, on the one hand, the foundation on which the di- vision of labour is built up, on the other hand, Manufacture, once introduced, develops in them new powers that are by nature fitted only for limited and special functions. m., but also of making them hunger during that time. This mode is based on the dominion of man over Nature. Capital is a so- cial relation of production. Meantime the need for foreign objects of utility 1 From this we may form an estimate of the shrewdness of the petit- bourgeois socialism, which, while perpetuating the production of commodi- ties, aims at abolishing the "antagonism" between money and commodities, and consequently, since money exists only by virtue of this antagonism, at abolishing money itself. It has already been stated, that where the finished article consists merely of a number of parts fitted togeth- er, the detail operations may re-establish themselves as genuine and separate handicrafts. The new manufactures were established at sea-ports, or at inland points beyond the control of the old municipalities and their guilds. Whilst the bill was under discussion, the Factory Inspectors laid before Parliament statistics of the infa- mous abuses due to this anomaly. A sells wine worth £40 to B, 1 "The idea of profits being paid by the consumers, is, assuredly, very absurd. The historical part is, to a great extent, a shameless plagiarism of Sir F. (Dr. Aikin, 1. II., p. In the discrete workshop (manufacture separee), on the contrary, no one will become rich, but many labourers will be comfortable; the saving and the industrious will be able to amass a little capi- tal, to put by a little for a birth of a child, for an illness, for them- selves or their belongings. The first chief function of money is to supply commodities with the material for the expression of their values, or to represent their values as magnitudes of the same denomination, qualitatively equal, and quantitatively comparable. But then demand and supply also cease to explain anything. In any case the market for commodities is only frequented by owners of commodities, and the power which these persons exercise over each other, is no other than the power of their com- modities. Money, on the contrary, as the medium of circulation, keeps continually within the sphere of circulation, and moves about in it. de Laborde in "De TEsprit d'Associa- tion dans tous les interets de la communaute." Paris 1818. In every country, certain days of the year become by habit recognised settling days for various large and recurrent payments. Nevertheless, the popular intuition was not at fault. The French Revolution had found passionate defend- ers in the United Kingdom; the "principle of population," slowly worked out in the eighteenth century, and then, in the midst of a great social cri- sis, proclaimed with drums and trumpets as the infallible antidote to the teachings of Condorcet, &.c, was greeted with jubilance by the English oli- garchy as the great destroyer of all hankerings afler human development. c, pp. We have now to consider this labour under a very different aspect from that which it had during the labour-process; there, we viewed it solely as that particular kind of human activity which changes cotton into yarn; there, the more the labour was suited to the work, the better the yarn, other circumstances remaining the same. But if all his brother capitalists were to do the same, where would he find his commodities in the market? * The number of such possible expressions is limited only by the number of the differ- ent kinds of commodities distinct from it. But from the moment that the forced labour is changed into wage-labour, from that moment the labour-fund, which the peasant himself continues as before to produce and reproduce, takes the form of a capital advanced in the form of wages by the lord. The technical conditions of the labour-process may be revolution- ised to such an extent, that where formerly ten men using ten implements of small value worked up a relatively small quanti- ty of raw material, one man may now, with the aid of one expen- sive machine, work up one hundred times as much raw material. They were an absurd anomaly, since the capitalist regulated his factory by his private legislation, and could by the poor-rates make up the wage of the agricultural labourer to the indispensable mini- mum. It has already been seen that, at the same time, the total number of persons employed in agriculture fell. This discrepancy is the result of his- torical causes, among which the chief are: — (1) The importation of foreign money into an imperfectly developed community. Every commodity, when it first steps into circulation, and undergoes its first change of form, does so only to fall out of circu- lation again and to be replaced by other commodities. Have not the English boasted of the in- genuity and dexterity of her working artists and manufacturers which have heretofore given credit and reputation to British wares in general? It both reproduces the equivalent of its own value-, and also produces an excess, a surplus-value, which may itself vary, may be more or less according to circumstances. c, p. Herr Vissering, Professor of Political Economy in the University of Leyden, appears to have a suspicion of this when, in his "Handboek van Praktische Staatshuishoudkunde, 1860-62," which reproduces all the plati- tudes of vulgar economy, he strongly supports handicrafts against the fac- tory system. The reports of the Gh. Empl. 6^7- d. It is only necessary for cap- ital to incorporate this additional labour-power, annually sup- plied by the working-class in the shape of labourers of all ages, with the surplus means of production comprised in the annual produce, and the conversion of surplus-value into capital is complete. The Cereal Crops include wheaX, oats, barley, rye, beans, and peas; the Green Crops, pota- toes, turnips, mangolds, beet-root, cabbages, carrots, parsnips, vetches, &c. 2 1. Rep. c, p. What is that equal something, that common substance, which admits of the value of the beds being expressed by a house? It was erroneously thought that the giving of reckoning names to definite weights of gold, is the same thing as fixing the value of those weights." (Karl Marx, 1. If, e.g., the number of labourers is a million, and the average working-day of a labourer is 10 hours, the social working- day consists of ten million hours. Jones: 1. We have here, therefore, a palpable difference between the circulation of money as capital, and its circulation as mere money. This power being of higher value, its consump- tion is labour of a higher class, labour that creates in equal times proportionally higher values than unskilled labour does. Nevertheless, if to-morrow morning labour generally were re- duced to a rational amount, and proportioned to the different sec- tions of the working-class according to age and sex, the working population to hand would be absolutely insufficient for the carrying on of national production on its present scale. He has no fears for the future, because he has now only the spare supply necessary to keep him. Their orig- inal mode of production was based on community of the soil, but not in the Slavonic or Indian form. The fact that the detail labourer produces no com- modities. 84, 85.) 2 Note to the third edition.— Subsequent very searching study of the primitive condition of man, led the author to the conclusion, that it was not the family that originally developed into the tribe, but that, on the con- trary, the tribe was the primitive and spontaneously developed form of human association, on the basis of blood relationship, and that out of the first incipient loosening of the tribal bonds, the many and various forms of the family were afterwards developed. Later on they part company and even become deadly foes. 1817, pp. While the rich have been growing richer, the poor have been growing less poor. Universal Money When money leaves the home sphere of circulation, it strips off the local garbs which it there assumes, of a standard of prices, of coin, of tokens, and of a symbol of value, and returns to its original form of bullion. 15.) "Le simple ouvrier, qui n'a que ses bras et son industrie, n'a rien qu'autant qu'il parvient a vendre a d'autres sa peine... . * The protection afforded by the Factory Acts against dangerous machin- ery has had a beneficial effect. Holland had ceased to be the nation prepon- derant in commerce and industry. c, p. There would no longer be any standard. Compulsory working to death is here the recognised form of over-work. can at anytime be reconverted into e , T T , - , Surplus-labour of 6 hours , formulae I. 1740.) "Can you see anything that makes a distinction between one class and the other?" "I have not ascertained that, but I know from house to house visitation, that it is a deplorable state of things in our district. The Grown lands thus fraudulently appropriated, together with the robbery of the Church estates, as far as these had not been lost again during the republican revolution, form the basis of the to-day princely domains of the English oligarchy. 106.) 2 "The isolation of the different stages of manufacture, consequent upon the employment oi manual labour, adds immensely to the cost of production, the loss mainly arising from the mere removals from one process to another." ("The Industry of Nations." Lond., 1855. For instance, the foot is merely the prime mover of the spinning-wheel, while the hand, working with the spindle, and drawing and twisting, performs the real operation of spinning. Between May and September the work lasts from 5 in the morning till 8 in the evening, and where the drying is done in the open air, it often lasts from 4 in the morning till 9 in the eve- ning. 2,369,837 lbs. 8 Numerous instances will be found in "Rep. Such ma- chines as the modern hydraulic press, the modern power-loom, and the modern carding engine, could never have been furnished by Manufacture. 2 Price is the money-name of the labour realised in a commodity. be considered as an engine, 1 "L'ouvrier qui porte dans ses bras tout un metier, peut aller partout exercer son industrie et trouver des moyens de subsister: 1'autre (the manu- facturing labourer) n'est qu'un accessoire qui, separe de ses confreres, n'a plus ni capacite, ni independance, et qui se trouve force d'accepter_ la loi qu'on juge a propos de lui imposer." (Storch., 1. 39, 40, 67, 77, &c. The greater part of them in fact return to the country, and especially in cases of severe illness. 1 The normal working- day exists here as a fraction of the actual working-day, and the latter, often during the whole year, lasts longer than the former. 1856.— 1 in 15. The means [of subsistence] being always supposed to be a fixed quantity. And just as in society, a general or a banker plays a great part, but mere man, on the other hand, a very shabby part, * so here with mere human labour. Sixth Rep.," Lond. . Here two different kinds of commodities (in our example the linen and the coat), evidently play two different parts. It may be supposed that it describes the horrors of a past age. He treats it as a thing inherent in the capitalist mode of production, which mode, in his eyes, is the natural form of so- cial production. CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO CAPITAL 599 SECTION 4.— CIRCUMSTANCES THAT, INDEPENDENTLY OF THE PROPORTIONAL DIVISION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO CAPITAL AND REVENUE, DETERMINE THE AMOUNT OF ACCUMULATION. of Insp. c, pp. 1 "II (l'argent) n'a d'autre mouvement que celui qui lui est imprim6 par les productions." (Le Trosne, 1. Smith recommends education of the people by the State, but prudently, and in homoeopathic doses. It is now 155. Therefore the great principle that the magnitude of a whole number, such as 10, is "regulated" by the number of times unity is contained in it, falls to the ground.— [The author explains in section 4 of this chapter, pp. 98-99. l Whether 20 yards of linen =1 coat or =20 coats or=x coats— that is, whether a given quantity of linen is worth few or many i The few economists, amongst whom is S. Wages amount to £52 a week. We have already learnt that machinery has possessed itself even of this branch of production on a scale that grows greater every day. 3 1 The monetary crisis referred to in the text, being a phase of every crisis, must be clearly distinguished from that particular form of crisis, which also is called a monetary crisis, but which may be produced by itself as an independent phenomenon in such a way as to react only indirectly on indus- try and commerce. "Ch. Emp. Toute religion qui n'est pas la leur, est une invention des hommes, tandis que leur propre religion est une emanation de Dieu — Ainsi il y a eu de l'histoire, mais il n'y en a plus." (Karl Marx. Gold and silver possess these properties by Nature. The value of one pound of yarn being eighteenpence, if our capitalist buys 10 lbs. But, as a matter of fact, the total quantity of the article produced by ma- chinery with a diminished number of workmen, instead of remain- ing equal to, by far exceeds the total quantity of the hand-made article that has been displaced. The deer in the parks of the great are demurely do- mestic cattle, fat as London aldermen. Now, it is true that the tailoring, which makes the coat, is concrete labour of a different sort from the weaving which makes the linen. Every change in this absolute value is therefore the effect, but never the cause, of a change in the magnitude of surplus-value. m., of which — an hour is subtracted for breakfast. 4 "All those who are paid by piece-work... By S. She herself also acknowledged that she could not keep the register... This change 1 Tutti i fenomeni dell' universo, sieno essi prodotti della mano dell' uomo, ovvero delle universali leggi della fisica, non ci danno idea di attuale creazione, ma unicamente di una modi ficazi one della materia. The victory of the nobility in the peasants' war put an end to that. We, therefore, first of all consider accumulation from an abstract point of view— i.e., as a mere phase in the actual proc- ess of production. Wakefield in his edition of Adam Smith's "Wealth of Nations," vol. 244.) CONTRADICTIONS IN THE FORMULA OF CAPITAL 159 ities may be sold at prices deviating from their values, but these deviations are to be considered as infractions of the laws of the exchange of commodities, J which in its normal state is an exchange of equivalents, consequently, no method for increasing value. Thus the laws of the production of value are only fully realised for the individual producer, when he produces as a capitalist, and employs a number of workmen together, whose labour, by its collective nature, is at once stamped as average so- cial labour. a 1 c, p 45. Wherever a part of society possesses the monopoly of the means of production, the labourer, free or not free, must add to the working-time necessa- ry for his own maintenance an extra working-time in order to pro- duce the means of subsistence for the owners of the means of pro- duction, 1 whether this proprietor be the Athenian xaXo; xayaOos, Etruscan theocrat, civis Romanus, Norman baron, American slave-owner, Wallachian Boyard, modern landlord or capitalist. These forms vary ac- cording to the extent to which the sewing-machine has become prev- alent in one branch of industry or the other, to the time during which it has been in operation, to the previous condition of the workpeople, to the preponderance of manufacture, of handicrafts 1 An instance. At that time, therefore, division of labour and co-operation in the workshops, were viewed more from the positive aspect, that they made the 1 In old-fashioned manufactures the revolts of the workpeople against machinery, even to this day, occasionally assume a savage character, as in the case of the Sheffield file cutters in 1865. 19, 20. 25, 26. 2 "Among the wild Indians in America, almost everything is the la- bourer's, 99 parts of a hundred are to be put upon the account of labour. If the value of the labour-power be 4 shillings, or the necessary labour-time 8 hours, and the surplus-value be 2 shil- lings, or the surplus-labour 4 hours, and if, in consequence of an increase in the productiveness of labour, the value of the labour- power fall to 3 shillings, or the necessary labour to 6 hours, the surplus-value will rise to 3 shillings, or the surplus-labour to 6 hours. If history took a long time to get at the bottom of the mystery of wages, nothing, on the other hand, is more easy to understand than the necessity, the raison d'etre, of this phenomenon. . These gentle- men, however, attained their end through the obliging nature of the local poor law boards. ... Why could not boys learn their handicraft in the day-time? Although in the district of Stoke, only 36.6% and in Wolstanton only 30.4% of the adult male popu- lation above 20 are employed in the potteries, among the men of that age in the first district more than half, in the second, 2 nearly -=- of the whole deaths are the result of pulmonary diseases o among the potters. "It seems to be a law of Nature that the poor should be to a certain degree im- provident" [i.e., so improvident as to be born without a silver spoon in the mouthj, "that there may always be some to fulfil 1 "De jour en jour il devient done plus clair que les rapports de pro- duction dans lesquels se meut la bourgeoisie n'ont pas un caractere un, un caractere simple, mais un caractere de duplicite; que dans les memes rap- ports dans lesquels se produit la richesse, la misere se produit aussi; que dans les memes rapports dans lesquels il y a developpement des forces produc- tives, il y a une force productive de repression; que ces rapports ne pro- duisent la richesse bourgeoise, e'est-a-dire la richesse de la classe bourgeoise, qu'en aneantissant continuellement la richesse des membres integrants de cette classe et en produisant un proletariat toujours croissant." (Karl Marx: "Misere de la Philosophie," p. Engels und Karl Marx: "Manifest der Kommunistischen Partei." Lond. c, p. 101. And to the injustice arising from the unfair conditions of competition, in regard to hours, that would be created if the smaller places of work were exempt, would be added the disadvantage to the larger manufacturers, of finding their supply of juvenile and female labour drawn off to the places of work exempt from legislation. It is developed in manufacture which cuts down the labourer into a detail labourer. xxi, xxii. 8.) 3 Belgium, the paradise of Continental Liberalism, shows no trace of this movement. l For the rest, it is a matter of course, that Political Economy, acting in the interests of the capitalist class, has not failed to ex- ploit the doctrine of Adam Smith, viz., that the whole of that part of the surplus-product which is converted into capital, is consumed by the working-class. "The class of capitalists are from the first partially, and they become ultimately completely, discharged from the necessity of the manual labour." ("Textbook of Lectures on the Political Economy of Nations. Oh o x 03 °3 s X, X « s » ^ U U Act U> H H ^ < MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 453 The enormous power, inherent in the factory system, of ex- panding by jumps, and the dependence of that system on the markets of the world, necessarily beget feverish production, followed by over-filling of the markets, whereupon contraction of the markets brings on crippling of production. if the factory-owners choose." 2 Workmen and factory inspectors protested on hygienic and moral grounds, but Capital answered: "My deeds upon my head! I crave the law, The penalty and forfeit of my bond." In fact, according to statistics laid before the House of Com- mons on July 26th, 1850, in spite of all protests, on July 15th, 1850, 3,742 children were subjected to this "practice" in 257 factories. Nathaniel Forster, quite on the side of the workmen.) 428 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION In the 17th century nearly all Europe experienced revolts of the workpeople against the ribbon-loom, a machine for weaving ribbons and trimmings, called in Germany Bandmuhle, Schnur- miihle, and Muhlenstuhl. This 24 hours' process of production exists to-day as a system in many of the branches of industry of Great Britain that are still "free," in the blast-furnaces, forges, plate- rolling mills, and other metallurgical establishments in Eng- land, Wales, and Scotland. Say as to the no- tion of value. A writer of the 18th century, often quoted already, the author of the "Essay on Trade and Commerce," only betrays the innermost secret soul of English capitalism, when he declares the historic mission of England to be the forcing down of English wages to the level of the French and the Dutch. . c, p. 125, 126.) DIVISION OP LABOUR AND MANUFACTURE 353 ly-developed means of communication; and in this sense the North- ern States of the American Union, for instance, are more thickly populated than India. The parish of Bradenham comprises 1,000 acres; it numbered, in 1851, 36 houses and a population of 84 males and 54 females. per week. 470 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION e. 885.) * Here (from "Thus the linen..." to "commodities in general," p. The facts are simple The revolution in agriculture has kept pace with emig- ration. B. The commodity is always in the hands of the seller; the money, as a means of purchase, always in the hands of the buyer. The only thing then that can render the labouring man industrious, is a moderate quan- tity of money, for as too little will, according as his temper is, either dispirit or make him desperate, so too much will make him insolent and lazy . M. If his capacity for labour remains unsold, the labourer derives no benefit from it, but rather he will feel it to be a cruel nature-imposed necessity that this capacity has cost for its pro- duction a definite amount of the means of subsistence and that it will continue to do so for its reproduction. To borrow an illustration from chemistry, butyric acid is a different substance from propyl formate. 15 8 1. Their number grew 1 1 constantly, far beyond 100,000 They paid rents varying from -jx to-=- of the product in money or in kind. a week)?" "I cannot speak to that." (n. 67-82. The great part that the public debt, and the fiscal system corresponding with it, has played in the capitalisation of wealth and the expropriation of the masses, has led many writers, like Gobbett, Doubleday and others, to seek in this, Incorrectly, the fundamental cause of the misery of the modern peoples. I should add, for your (the Home Secretary's) informa- tion that an isolated house, called the Pest-house, which is set apart for parishioners who might be suffering from infectious dis- eases, has been continually occupied by such patients for many months past, and is also now occupied; that in one family five children died from small-pox and fever; that from the 1st April to the 1st September this year, a period of five months, there have been no fewer than ten deaths from small-pox in the parish, four of them being in the huts already referred to; that it is impossible to ascertain the exact number of persons who have suffered from that disease although they are known to be many, from the fact of the families keeping it as private as possible." 1 The labourers in coal and other mines belong to the best paid categories of the British proletariat. . The shorter the period taken to reproduce its total value, the less is the danger of moral depreciation; and the longer the working-day, the shorter is that period. This division of labour, like every other, is an effect of past, and a cause of future progress . Lamentable in- deed, must be the case, when, notwithstanding all that is evn dent with regard to the quality of the present accommodation, it is the common conclusion of competent observers that even the general badness of dwellings is an evil infinitely less urgent than their mere numerical insufficiency. But these commodities, before coming to market, were part of the general annual product, part of the total mass of objects of every kind, into which the sum of the individual capi- tals, i.e., the total capital of society, had been converted in the course of the year, and of which each capitalist had in hand only an aliquot part. As early as 1846. 180,000,000 of debts contracted by the sovereigns!" 1 Colonial system, public debts, heavy taxes, protection, com- mercial wars, &c, these children of the true manufacturing period, increase gigantically during the infancy of Modern Indus- try. 1 10 Marshall Street, No. 49 . The manufacture of one of the means of production is here united with that of the product. . 3 c , , then ' ' Working-day of 12 hours the necessary labour-time being 12 hours less the surplus-labour of 6 hours, we get the following result, Surplus-labour of 6 hours __100 Necessary labour of 6 hours - 100 1 That part of the product which merely replaces the constant capital advanced, is of course left out in this calculation. What- ever difference in skill there may be between the labour of a spinner and that of a jeweller, the portion of his labour by which the jeweller merely replaces the value of his own labour-power, does not in any way differ in quality from the additional portion by which he creates surplus-value. 4 The Northamptonshire manufacturer commits a pious fraud, par- donable in one whose heart is so full. Hence their relations to each other 1 The learned Professor Roscher, after first informing us that "the false definitions of money may be divided into two main groups: those which make it more, and those which make it less, than a commodity," gives us a long and very mixed catalogue of works on the nature of money, from which it appears that he has not the remotest idea of the real history of the theory; and then he moralises thus: "For the rest, it is not to be denied that most of the later economists do not bear sufficiently in mind the peculiarities that distinguish money from other commodities" (it is then, after all, either more or less than a commodity!)... per yard to Id., leaving the earnings of the men exactly the same as before for the same labour. The substance linen becomes the vis- ible incarnation, the social chrysalis state of every kind of human labour. But an increase in the variable component of the capital employed necessitates an increase in its constant component, too, in the workshops, implements, &c, and, in partic- ular, in the raw material, the call for which grows quicker than the number of workmen. 1 The result would be found yet more unfavourable if we went further back. Secondly, it serves as an ideal means of purchase. 2 It is, however, clear that in any given economic formation of so- ciety, where not the exchange-value but the use-value of the prod- uct predominates, surplus-labour will be limited by a given set of wants which may be greater or less, and that here no boundless thirst for surplus-labour arises from the nature of the production itself. c.) 1 "The doing of it (agricultural work) at the critical juncture is of so much the greater consequence." ("An Inquiry into the Connexion between the Present Price," &c, p. CO-OPERATION 325 sumed in common, they give up a smaller part of their value to each single product; partly because the total value they part with is spread over a greater quantity of products, and partly because their value, though absolutely greater, is, having regard to their sphere of action in the process, relatively less than the value of isolated means of production. . The progress of our investigation will show that exchange-value is the only form in which the value of commodities can manifest itself or be expressed. vi. 4 As will be seen more in detail in the fourth book of this work, Adam Smith has not established a single new proposition relating to division of labour. In Holland, therefore, where this system was first inaugurated, the great patriot, De Witt, has in his "Maxims" extolled it as the best system for making the wage-labourer sub- missive, frugal, industrious, and overburdened with labour. Re- turn, etc." 8 March, 1861, London, 1862. It is the only original bit of value formed during this process, the only portion of the value of the product created by this process. . is under present circum- stances of great advantage to the family, since it adds that amount of income which . In this way, all along the line of exchange, hoards of gold and silver of varied extent are accumulated. I, p. All punishments naturally resolve themselves into fines and deductions from wages, and the law-giving talent of the factory Lycurgus so arranges matters, that a violation of his laws is, if possible, more profitable to him than the keeping of them. MAGNITUDE OF CAPITAL ADVANCED The proportion in which surplus-value breaks up into capi- tal and revenue being given, the magnitude of the capital accumu- lated clearly depends on the absolute magnitude of the surplus- value. The gang consists of 10 to 40 or 50 persons, women, young persons of both sexes (13-18 years of age, although the boys are for the most part eliminated at the age of 13), and children of both sexes (6-13 years of age). It is certain, too, that all those things only represent the labour which has created them, and if they have a value, or even two distinct values, they can only derive them from that (the value) of the labour from which they emanate." (Ricar- do. 58, sq. Then the free labourer gives the capitalist every week 6x6 or 36 hours of surplus- labour. 1st Ed., London, 1707; 2nd Ed., London, 1745. The annual return of that mill, supposing the capital to be turned once -a year, and gross profits to be 15 percent., ought to be goods worth THE RATE OP SURPLUS-VALUE 225 £115,000.... WEEKLY AMOUNT OF NUTRIMENT Quantity of Nitrogen- ous Ingre- dients Quantity of Non-Nitro- genous In- gredients Quantity of Mineral Matter Total Portland (convict) . On Fridays they always begin sooner, some about ten o'clock, and continue in some cases, at work, either in making or delivering the bread up to 8 p. We have, therefore, got a double result. I. The facts themselves are confirmed by many other writers of the time, amorig others by Josiah Tucker. 1839-44, v. A brief hint at a few facts must suffice. c, p. In order to make their work coincide with that of the adult male labourers up to 8.30 p. Hence in England an embittered struggle of the corporate towns against these new industrial nurseries. * Gold and silver serve as international means of purchasing [Added in the 4th German edition. It has two great mischiefs in it. 3yd." 4 Here we have more produced in eleven hours than previously in twelve, and entirely in consequence of more steady application and econ- omy of time by the workpeople. for "young persons and women" only. But this prejudice was first established as a dogma by the arch- Philistine, Jeremy Bentham, that insipid, pedantic, leather- tongued oracle of the ordinary bourgeois intelligence of the 19th century.' Bentham is among philosophers what Martin Tupper is among poets. The irruption of Marx into Society, as I may call his book, must be warded off... "You acknowledge," he says, "that the more expenses and the cost of la- bour can, in the manufacture of industrial products, be reduced without injury to production, the more advantageous is such reduc- tion, because it diminishes the price of the finished article. 564 PART VII THE ACCUMULATION OF CAPITAL The conversion of a sum of money into means of production and labour-power, is the first step taken by the quantum of value that is going to function as capital. 2 But what is it that forms the bond between the at Kendal, blankets at Whitney, and so forth." (Berkeley:"The Quenist," 1751, § 520.) 1 A. p. . extending it may be over two or three years, administered by special commissioners added to the Boards of Guardians in the cotton districts, under special legislative regu- lations, enforcing some occupation or labour, as a means of keep- ing up at least the moral standard of the recipients of the loan... At the same time arise large establishments for flax-spinning and weaving, in which the men "set free" now work for wages. . and it is not a little curious that all the law-givers of Europe endeavoured to prevent this by statutes, viz., statutes against usury The power of the capitalist over all the 1 Industrial here in contradistinction to agricultural. The totality of the necessaries of life consists, however, of various commodities, each the product of 316 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION a distinct industry; and the value of each of those commodities enters as a component part into the value of labour-power. xxv., n, 162, and II. Not only the labour, but also the raw material and the product now appear in quite a new light, very different from that in which we viewed them in the labour-process pure and simple. Every other commodity now becomes 1 In Homer, tor instance, the value of an article is expressed in a se- ries oi different things. Many boys having attended school for the required number of hours, when they return to school after the expiration of their six months' work in the print work, are in the same condition as when they first attended school as print-work boys, that they have lost all they gained by their previous school attendance. The events that take place outside the sphere of circulation, in the interval between the buying and selling, do not affect the form of this movement. He con- stantly reproduces his own labour-fund, which never, in his case, takes the form of a money payment for his labour, advanced by another person. can be worked more than 11 y hours a day, that is, 12 hours for 5 days in the week, and nine on Saturday. I believe that a woman having children (and there are plenty on the banks that have) cannot do her duty to her chil- dren." (ns. This is therefore the price of the 20 lbs. They frequently build their own houses, and carry to market, at whatever distance, the produce of their own industry. The relative form and the equivalent form are two intimately connected, mutually dependent and inseparable elements of the expression of value; but, at the same time, are mutually exclusive, antagonistic extremes — i.e., poles of the same expression. Thus are the- virtues, the peculiar virtues of the female character to be per- verted to her injury— thus all that is most dutiful and tender in her nature is made a means of her bondage and suffering." (Ten Hours' Factory Bill. 1 Thus, after the extension of the Factory Act to the potteries, great increase of power-jiggers in place of hand-moved jiggers. The capitalist may now be said to be the first owner of all the wealth of the com- munity, though no law has conferred on him the right to this prop- erty . Amongst the commodities which, in form B, figure as particular equivalents of the linen, and, in form C, ex- press in common their relative values in linen, this foremost place has been attained by one in particular— namely, gold. are .... of cotton are consumed weekly, of which 600 lbs. 64,506 st. Besides, the manufacturers petitioned Parliament to allow the employment of young persons and women for 12 hours during one year longer. In course of time military and clerical digni- taries usurped, along with the common land, the labour spent upon it. For instance, in the above case, the value of the labour-power cannot sink from three shillings to two, unless an increase in the productiveness of labour makes it possible to produce in 4 hours the same quantity of necessaries as previously required 6 hours to produce. would suit us (!) very well, but the factory hours, 6 a. Given the difference between the value of the machinery, and the value transferred by it in a day to the product, the extent to which this latter value makes the product dearer, depends in the first instance, upon the size of the product; so to say, upon its area. Suppose, then, a machine cost as much as the wages for a year of the 150 men it displaces, say £3,000; this £3,000 is by no means the expres- sion in money of the labour added to the object produced by these 150 men before the introduction of the machine, but only of that portion of their year's labour which was expended for themselves and represented by their wages. If the interval in time between the two 1 Self-evident as this may be, it is nevertheless for the most part unob- served by political economists, and especially by the "Free-trader Vulgaris." 114 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION complementary phases of the complete metamorphosis of a com- modity become too great, if the split between the sale and the purchase become too pronounced, the intimate connexion between them, their oneness, asserts itself by producing — a crisis. If, in a society with capitalist production, anarchy in the so- cial division of labour and despotism in that of the workshop are mutual conditions the one of the other, we find, on the contrary, in those earlier forms of society in which the separation of trades has been spontaneously developed, then crystallised, and finally made permanent by law, on the one hand, a specimen of the organi- sation of the labour of society, in accordance with an approved and authoritative plan, and on the other, the entire exclusion of divi- DIVISION OF LABOUR AND MANUFACTURE 357 sion of labour in the workshop, or at all events a mere dwarf- like or sporadic and accidental development of the same. 17, § 14). The capital advanced is consequently reduced from c-fv to v, and instead of the value of the product (c+v)+s we have now the value produced (v-j-s). c, pp. Modern Manufacture I now proceed, by a few examples, to illustrate the principles laid down above. l "The fraudulent mill-owner begins work a quarter of an hour (sometimes more, sometimes less) before 6 a. 10. His observations during many preceding years had led him to the conclusion that "to avert starvation diseases," the daily food of an average woman ought to contain at least 3,900 grains of carbon with 180 grains of nitrogen; the daily food of an average man, at least 4,300 grains of carbon with 200 grains of nitrogen; for women, about the same quantity of nutritive elements as are contained in 2 lbs. Ces maitres-artisans savent a peu pres combien d'ouvrage un com- pagnon-artisan peut faire par jour dans chaque metier, et les payent souvent a proportion de l'ouvrage qu'ils font; ainsi ces compagnons travaillent autant qu'ils peuvent, pour leur propre interet, sans autre inspection" (Cantillon, "Essai sur la Nature du Commerce en general," Amst. Machinery, by throwing every member of that family on to the labour-market, spreads the value of the man's labour-power over his whole family. 1750.) "That equally applies to agricultural employments, does it not?" "Yes, but that is only for two seasons, and we have work all the four seasons " (n. 2 781 towns given in the census for 1861 for England and Wales "con- tained 10,960,998 inhabitants, while the villages and country parishes con- tained 9,105,226. From the treatment of the production of surplus- value, so far, it follows that not every sum of money, or of value, is at pleasure 1 Further particulars will be given in Book IV. The last clause speaks volumes as to the over-work in this old-fashioned, homely line of business. c.,p. of Insp. This conversion takes place in the market, within the sphere of circulation. If we really exchanged equal values, neither party could make a profit. Instead of each man being allowed to perform all the various operations in suc- cession, these operations are changed into disconnected, isolated ones, carried on side by side; each is assigned to a different arti- ficer, and the whole of them together are performed simultaneous- ly by the co-operating workmen. One gable end was convex, the other concave, and on this last, unfor- 1 "New married couples are no edifying study for grown-up brothers and sisters: and though instances must not be recorded, sufficient data are remem- bered to warrant the remark, that great depression and sometimes death are the lot of the female participator in the offence of incest." (Dr. Hunter, 1. Modern Industry alone, and finally, sup- plies, in machinery, the lasting basis of capitalistic agriculture, expropriates radically the enormous majority of the agricultural 1 "Twenty pounds of wool converted unobtrusively into the yearly cloth- ing oi a labourer's family by its ownindustryin the intervals of other work — this makes no show; but bring it to market, send it to the factory, thence to the broker, thence to the dealer, and you will have great commercial opera- tions, and nominal capital engaged to the amount of twenty times its value.... Seventh Report. Some of the masters themselves murmured: "On account of the contradictory decisions of the magistrates, a condition of things altogether ab- normal and anarchical obtains. On the other hand, they must show that they are use-values before they can be realised as values. Children of nine or ten years are dragged from their squalid beds at two, three, or four o'clock in the morning and compelled to work for a bare subsistence until ten, eleven, or twelve at night, their limbs 1 1. 4 A classical example of over-work, of hard and inappropriate la- bour, and of its brutalising effects on the workman from his child- hood upwards, is afforded not only by coal-mining and miners generally, but also by tile and brick making, in which industry the recently invented machinery is, in England, used only here and there. The abolition of such taxes makes no change whatever in the quanti- ty of surplus-value that the capitalist extorts at first-hand from the labourer. But if, on the one hand, it is a popular delusion to ascribe stagnation in production and circulation to insufficiency of the cir- culating medium, it by no means follows, on the other hand, that an actual paucity of the medium in consequence, e.g., of bungling legislative inter- ference with the regulation of currency, may not give rise to such stagnation. In ancient civilised countries the labourer, though free, is by a law of Nature dependent on capitalists; in colonies this depend- ence must be created by artificial means." 4 1 1. In the first phase or sale, the linen plays these two parts in its own person. Thus, at an early period in paper manufacture, the tear- ing up of the rags was done by paper-mills; and in metal works, the pounding of the ores was effected by stamping mills. The third and lastly developed form expresses the values of the whole world of commodities in terms of a single commodity set apart for the purpose, namely, the linen, and thus represents to us their values by means of their equality with linen. In this place, there- fore, we dwell only on one point, the enormous mortality, dur- ing the first few years of their life, of the children of the oper- atives. Relative surplus- value is, on the contrary, directly proportional to that productive- ness. 48,354 2,031 Scotland . See "Child. Clothing Total. of yarn, having a value of 30 shillings. The commissioner justly remarks that though as a rule machines take the place of men, here literally young persons replace machines. Silver is seldom found native; however it occurs in special quartz that is separated from the lode with comparative ease and contains mostly 40-90% silver; or it is contained, in smaller quantities, in copper, lead and other ores which in themselves are worthwhile working. First, as cheapening commodities, and thereby bringing about a fall in the value of labour-power. Rep.," p. In this aerial bleaching, drying-rooms were used at temperatures of from 90° to 100° Fahrenheit, in which the work was done for the most part by girls. Ill, 48. We have seen, too, how this antagonism vents its rage in the creation of that monstrosity, an industrial reserve army, kept in misery in order to be always at the disposal of capital; in the incessant hu- man sacrifices from among the working-class, in the most reckless squandering of labour-power, and in the devastation caused by a social anarchy which turns every economic progress into a social calamity. (3.) Increase or diminution in surplus-value is always conse- quent on, and never the cause of, the corresponding diminution or increase in the value of labour-power. 15,160 . of Fact., 31 Oct., 1862," pp. If, on the other hand, the necessary labour=6 hours and the surplus-labour=6 hours, the degree of exploitation remains, as before, 100% , while the actual amount of exploitation has increased 20%, namely from five hours to six. of yarn, giving, as before, eighteenpence as the price of a pound. Garli, Note to P. 3 "Ch. Empl. Their occupation is unwholesome, owing to the long hours, although in most cases they are not so long as under the old system. PRODUCTIVITY OF LABOUR. This term is used in opposition, on the one hand, to the "idle poor," beggars, etc., on the other to those labourers, who, pigeons not yet plucked, are still possessors of their own means of labour. I have often knelt down to feed him as he stood by the machine, for he could not leave it or stop." Smith, the managing partner of a Manchester factory: "We (he means his "hands" who work for "us") work on, with no stoppage for meals, so that the day's work of lOyhours is finished by 4.30 p. They become recruits of crime. Chandlery, 1851, 4,949: 1861, 4,686. The object of all development of the pro- ductiveness of labour, within the limits of capitalist production, is to shorten that part of the working-day, during which the work- man must labour for his own benefit, and by that very shortening, to lengthen the other part of the day, during which he is at liberty to work gratis for the capitalist. of Fact., 31st October, 1865," pp. 440 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION and they, as regards these commodities, were not wage-labourers, but buyers. His natural wants, such as food, clothing, fuel, and housing, vary according to the climatic and other physical conditions of his country. 2 "These mute agents (machines) are always the produce of much less labour than that which they displace, even when they are of the same money- value." (Ricardo, 1. Second- ly, as altering the ratio of the surplus-value to the total capital ad- vanced, i.e., to the sum of the values of the constant and variable capital. "In one small cellar measuring 1,500 cubic feet . * The par- celling-out of the means of production among innumerable owners, working on their own account, annihilates, along with the cen- tralisation of capital, all the foundations of combined labour. 20. On the one side of the equation we have an ordinary commodity, which is in reality a use-value. m. — This applies to Germany too. The general average (of the cost of each prisoner in the different prisons during the period 1847-1849), has been 63 centimes for all prisons. of coffee. Let us assume, that some invention enables the spinner to spin as much cotton in 6 hours as he was able to spin before in 36 hours. m. 1 The machine proper is therefore a mechanism that, after being set in motion, performs with its tools the same operations that were formerly done by the workman with similar tools. THE WORKING-DAY 287 that it will not be lawful to work for 10 hours continuously, from 9 a. of Fact, lor the hall-year, ending 30th April, 1855, pp. (10.) Northamptonshire Brinworth, Pickford and Floore: in these villages in the winter 20-30 men were lounging about the streets from want of work. and 6 p. It is at the same time consumption of his labour-power by the capitalist who bought it. For Cacus means the villain that is a pious usurer, and steals, robs, eats everything. It supplies him, for instance, with stones for throwing, grinding, pressing, cutting, &c. c. But as regards the instru- ments of labour, such as buildings, coal, machinery, and so on, it is different; the limit up to which the additional labour re- quired for their production can increase, varies with the differ- ence between the quantity of the machine-made article, and the quantity of the same article that the same number of workmen could make by hand. As before, a definite portion of the product will be devoted to re- production. Torrens. c, p. 200.) * "It (the division of labour) produces also an economy ot time by separating the work into its different branches, all of which may be carried on into execution at the same moment .... lis ressemblent en ceci aux theologiens, qui eux aussi etablissent deux sortes de religions. The constant repetition of exchange makes it a normal social act. Gommensurately with the development of capitalist produc- tion and accumulation there develop the two most powerful levers of centralisation — competition and credit. But their proportional increase or diminution > »depends on their origi- nal magnitudes before the change in the productiveness of labour took place. 2 "Capital Farms." Two letters on the Flour Trade and the Dearness of Corn. Absolute surplus-value is relative, since it makes necessary such a development of the productiveness of labour, as will allow of the necessary labour-time being confined to a portion of the working-day. 86 2 id., p. For Modern Industry with its decennial cycles and periodic phases, which, moreover, as accumulation advances, are compli- cated by irregular oscillations following each other more and more quickly, that would indeed be a beautiful law, which pretends to make the action of capital dependent on the absolute variation of the population, instead of regulating the demand and supply of labour by the alternate expansion and contraction of capital, the labour-market now appearing relatively under-full, because cap- ital is expanding, now again over-full, because it is contracting. When machinery is applied to any of the preliminary or intermediate stages through which the subject of labour has to pass on its way to completion, there is an increased yield of material in those stages, and simultaneously an increased de- mand for labour in the handicrafts or manufactures supplied by the produce of the machines. The capital advanced would, in this case, not have expanded its value. Along with the constantly diminishing number of the magnates of capital, who usurp and monopolise all advantages of this process of transformation, grows the mass of misery, oppression, slavery, degradation, exploitation; but with this too grows the revolt of the working-class, a class always increasing in numbers, and disciplined, united, organised by the very mechanism of the process of capitalist production itself. When this result is attained, the process is at an end. 190, 381,5 37 lbs. 2 (piece-work), so advantageous to the employer ... But this much is clear; a scien- tific .analysis of competition is not possible, before we have a con- ception of the inner nature of capital, just as the apparent motions of the heavenly bodies are not intelligible to any but him, who is acquainted with their real motions, motions which are not direct- ly perceptible by the senses. It is that confinement of the revenues which feed them, to one or a few hands, which makes such undertakings possible." ' This power of Asiatic and Egyptian kings, Etruscan theocrats, &c, has in modern society been transferred to the capitalist, whether he be an isolated, or as in joint-stock companies, a collective capitalist. The simple commodity-form is therefore the germ of the money- form. Boston, 1836, Vol. Increase in the size of the machine, and in the number of its working tools, calls for a more massive mechanism to drive it; and this mechanism requires, in order to overcome its resistance, a mightier moving power than that of man, apart from the fact that man is a very imperfect instrument for producing uniform continued motion. Since the wages for piece-work were unaltered, the weekly wages depended on the quantity produced. Now let us examine the circuit M— C— M a little closer. We now know how the value paid by the purchaser to the possessor of this peculiar commodity, labour-power, is determined. I shall return to this letter later on; in spite of its erroneous theory of rent, it sees through the nature of capitalist production. 2 Bacon shows the connexion between a free, well-to-do peasantry and good infantry. Personal dependence here characterises the social relations of production just as much as it does the other spheres of life organised on the basis of that production. Each article costs, on an average, one shilling, and represents 2 hours of social labour; but under the al- tered mode of production it costs only ninepence, or contains only 1— hours' labour. We now come to the question: How is the labour intensified? . 231: "Les nations pauvres, c'est la ou le peuple est a son aise; et les nations riches, c'est la ou il est ordinairoment pauvre." THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 649 under the income tax, furnishes the surest basis. The weight of gold represented in imagination by the prices or money-names of commodities, must confront those commodities, within the circulation, in the shape of coins or pieces of gold of a given denomination. on Certain Verbal Disputes in Pol. According to the report of Mr. A. "The Committee believe that the hours of labour are lim- ited by natural laws, which cannot be violated with impu- nity. c, p. P. m. Consumption, the satisfaction of wants, in one word, use- value, is its end and aim. Thereupon the individual machine, that we have hitherto been considering, sinks into a mere factor in production by machinery. If the community's want of linen, and such a want has a limit like every other want, should already be saturated by the products of rival weavers, our friend's product is superfluous, redundant, and consequently useless. They are stowed away in cellars and lofts, or the hitherto respectable la- bourer's dwelling is transformed into a lodging-house whose per- sonnel changes as quickly as the billets in the 30 years' war. 14.) THE WORKING-DAY 293 One set of masters, this time as before, secured to itself special seigneurial rights over the children of the proletariat. Yearly income over £60 and under £100 238,626 5,015 , 222,575 4,703 m Of the yearly total income 1,979,066 „ 11,321 ,. * Since the working-day is constant in magnitude, and is represented by a value of constant magnitude, since, to every variation in Che magnitude of surplus-value, there corresponds an inverse variation in the value of labour-power, and since the value of labour-power cannot change, except in consequence of a change in the productiveness of labour, it clearly follows, under these conditions, that every change of magnitude in sur- plus-value arises from an inverse change of magnitude in the value of labour-power. 86-97, and pp. However then productive power may vary, the same labour, exercised during equal periods of time, always yields equal amounts of value. — Ed. 1 Robert Owen, the father of Co-operative Factories and Stores, but who, as before remarked, in no way shared the illusions of his followers with regard 594 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION SECTION 10.— MODERN INDUSTRY AND AGRICULTURE The revolution called forth by modern industry in agricul- ture, and in the social relations of agricultural producers, will be investigated later on. 140-146, and p. But once in circulation, coins are, so to say, made responsible for one another. F. In spite of this, all these pieces taken as a whole, may have had super- fluous labour-time spent upon them. What silly tautology results from the attempt to represent the capitalistic limits of the labour-fund as its natural and social limits may be seen, e.g., in Professor Fawcett. he would believe almost anything they said. It does not, there- fore, change immediately the mode of production. This fundamental truth once established, Mill establishes his own superiority over the mercantilists. Hence, in comparison with the independent handicraft, more is produced in a given time, or the productive power of labour is increased. this intoxicating augmentation of wealth and power . The circle in which simple reproduction moves, alters its form, and, to use Sismondi's expression, changes into a spiral. 906.) 4 "Dove e egualita non e lucro." (Galiani, "Delia Moneta in Custodi, Parte Moderna," t. We limit ourselves therefore to a few points characteristic of time-wages. was size. (What cynical naivete!) We think that the increase would be more than the trade, with due regard to its being successfully carried out, could fairly bear. 204.) 2 A. Despite the fanatical opposition of the army of perjured Free- traders, with Bright and Cobden at their head, the Ten Hours' Bill, struggled for so long, went through Parliament. MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OF COMMODITIES H5 point. "The application of power to the process of combing wool ... In no science is such a big fuss made with commonplace truisms as in Political Economy. If the exploitation of the labourers already employed do not increase, either extensively or intensively, then additional labour-power must be found. Receipts. c, p. . 303 CHAPTER XI RATE AND MASS OF SURPLUS-VALUE In this chapter, as hitherto, the value of labour-power, and therefore the part of the working-day necessary for the reproduction or maintenance of that labour-power, are supposed to be given, constant magnitudes. In like manner he procures his other means of subsistence and means of production. 168, 169.) THE CONCEPT OF RELATIVE SURPLUS-VALUE 317 ing-day of 12 hours, 24 instead of 12 such articles. "It is extraordinarily fatiguing work. c, p. An organised system of machines, to which motion is com- municated by the transmitting mechanism from a central auto- maton, is the most developed form of production by machinery. . It took both time and experience be- fore the workpeople learnt to distinguish between machinery and its employment by capital, and to direct their attacks, not against the material instruments of production, but against the mode in which they are used. Meanwhile, we hang the small thieves... ("Report of Insp. But while in the subsequent ten years the population in the villages and the country increased half a million, the population in the 580 towns increased by a mil- lion and a half (1,554,067). x In order to be sold as a commodity in the market, labour must at all events exist before it is sold. * The matter takes quite another aspect, when we contemplate, not the single capitalist, and the single labourer, but the capital- ist class and the labouring class, not an isolated process of produc- tion, but capitalist production in full swing, and on its actual so- cial scale. So in Thucydides, 1. We shall see hereafter, that the "master" can sing quite another song, when he is threatened with the loss of his "living" automaton. E.) 238 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION landlord, besides a mass of detailed payments in kind: (1), 12 days of general labour; (2), one day of field labour; (3), one day of wood carrying. 1 This resistance is moreover lessened by the apparent lightness of machine work, and by the more pliant and docile character of the women and children employed on it. But the movement 1 Destutt de Tracy, although, or perhaps because, he was a member of the Institute, held the opposite view. Hence, a definite por- tion of each year's product belongs to the domain of production. . It thus becomes evident that, since the existence of commodities as values is purely social, this social existence can be expressed by the totality of their social relations alone, and consequently that the form of their value must be a socially recognised form. If he loses his slave, he loses capital that can only be restored by new outlay in the slave-mart. At all events, they "were pressing on their food-supply." The "clearing of estates," or as it is called in Germany, "Bauern- legen," occurred in Germany especially after the 30 years' war, and led to peasant-revolts as late as 1790 in Kursachsen. Labour cannot emancipate it- self in the white skin where in the black it is branded. By its reference to the coat as its equivalent, as something that can be exchanged for it. It is other- wise with the corvee. Fielden: "The Curse of the Factory System", Lond., 1836, p. These farms were fiefs, sub-fiefs, &.C, according to the value and extent of the domains, many of them only containing a few acres. If this gross product be sold, converted into money, the capital-value regains its original form. As regards value in general, it is the weak point of the classi- cal school of Political Economy that it nowhere, expressly and with full consciousness, distinguishes between labour, as it appears in the value of a product and the same labour, as it appears in the use-value of that prod- uct. x The general rate of surplus-value is, there- fore, ultimately affected by the whole process, only when the in- crease in the productiveness of labour, has seized upon those branches of production that are connected with, and has cheapened those commodities that form part of, the necessary means of subsist- ence, and are therefore elements of the value of labour-power. And I on each occasion meet them as a mere owner of either money or commodities, as a buyer or a seller, and, what is more, in both sets of transactions, I am opposed to A only as a buyer and to B only as a seller, to the one only as money, to the other only as commodities, and to neither of them as capital or a capitalist, or as representative of anything that is more than money or commodities, or that can produce any effect beyond what money and commodities can. In economic forms of society of the most different kinds, there occurs, not only simple reproduction, but, in varying de- grees, reproduction on a progressively increasing scale. 262. Horrocks and Jacson. But what is the value of a commodity? 14 cottages, each with 1 bedroom, were visited. xix., xx., xxi. and 5s. The injurious consequences soon manifested themselvesin reductions of wages, and so sweepingly quick was the fall in the price of labour, that many firms now pay only one half of the original wages. Some decades later, the colonial system took its revenge on the descendants of the pious pilgrim fathers, who had grown seditious in the meantime. Thus, Beccaria: "Ciascuno prova coll'esperienza, che applicando la mano e l'ingegno sempre alio stesso genere di opere e di produtte, egli piu facili, piu abbondanti e migliori ne traca risultati, di quellochese ciascuno isolatamente le cose tutte a se necessarie soltanto facesse.... This point of view, however, does not fall within the horizon of simple circulation." ("Zur Kritik, &c," pp. 44, n. We have seen that the means of production transfer value to the new product, so far only as during the labour-process they lose value in the shape of their old use-value. The sale of labour-power, as will be remembered, takes place for a definite period of time. The price of the working-hour thus found serves as the unit measure for the price of labour. The lessee [the capitalist exploiter] meanwhile has no pecuniary motive for resisting that division of the bargain; well knowing that if its latter conditions be exorbitant, the consequences fail, not on him, that his labourers on whom they fall have not educa- tion enough to know the value of their sanitary rights, that nei- ther obscenest lodging nor foulest drinking water will be appreci- able inducements towards a 'strike.'" 1 (d.) Effect of Crises on the best paid part of the Working-Class Before I turn to the regular agricultural labourers, 1 may be allowed to show, by one example, how industrial revulsions affect even the best-paid, the aristocracy, of the working-class. Otway, Belfast. it ap- peared, were, six or eight months ago, earning the highest wages paid to artisans Their number would be more than dou- bled by the count of those who, having exhausted all their sav- ings, still refuse to apply to the parish, because they have a little left to pawn. 17. xxi, pp. x The usurpation of the common lands allowed him to augment greatly his stock of cattle, almost without cost, whilst they yielded him a richer supply of manure for the tillage of the soil. Experience shows that this reduction is constantly being made. In the following hour and 12 minutes, the spinner produces 2 lbs. In the time of Mirabeau, the lion of the Revolution, the great manufactories were still called manufactures reunies, workshops thrown into one, as we speak of fields thrown into one. The fact that the corn and the clothes are equivalents, does not deprive the process of all meaning, as it 1 "On n'echange pas de I'argent contre de l'argent," says Mercier dc la Riviere to the Mercantilists (1. c, p xxv., n. 2 Since, on the one hand, the values of the variable capital and of the labour-power purchased by that capital are equal, and the value of this labour-power determines the necessary portion of the working-day; and since, on the other hand, the 1 In this work, we have, up to now, employed the term "necessary labour-time," to designate the time necessary under given social conditions for the production of any commodity. But the over-work beyond this amount is in many cases, to use the words of the English official report, "truly fearful." 1 "It is impossible," the report continues, "for any mind to realise the amount of work described in the following passages as being performed by boys of from 9 to 12 years of age .... . Intel- ligence in production expands in one direction, because it van- ishes in many others. Those ... For them there consequently exists neither value, nor magnitude of value, anywhere except in its expression by means of the exchange- relation of commodities, that is, in the daily list of prices current. On the other hand, the imaginary price-form may some- times conceal either a direct or indirect real value-relation; for in- stance, the price of uncultivated land, which is without value, because no human labour has been incorporated in it. Here we find among other matters, a normal Belgian labourer's family, whose yearly income and ex- penditure he calculates on very exact data, and whose conditions of nourishment are then compared with those of the soldier, sail- or, and prisoner. Once for all I may here state, that by classical Political Economy, I understand that economy 'which, since the time of W. 2 Where block- printing, the old method of printing calico by hand, has been superseded by machine printing, a single machine prints, with the aid of one man or boy, as much calico of four colours in one hour, as it formerly took 200 men to do. The shorter fibre of the Surat cotton and its dirty condition, the greater fragility of the thread, the substitution of all sorts of heavy ingredients for flour in sizing the warps, all these lessened the speed of the ma- chinery, or the number of the looms that could be superintended by one weaver, increased the labour caused by defects in the ma- chinery, and reduced the piece-wage by reducing the mass of the product turned off. They broke out in open revolt not only against the Ten Hours' Act, but against the whole of the legislation that since 1833 had aimed at restricting in some measure the "free" exploita- tion of labour-power. The latter process requires something more than a good stomach. On the treatment of the slaves there is a good compila- tion in Charles Comte, "Traite de la Legislation." 3me ed. But that is not all. 76.) THE BUYING AND SELLING OF LABOUR-POWER 171 special article. . So far as this depreciation makes itself acutely felt in competi- tion, the burden falls on the labourer, in the increased exploita- tion of whom the capitalist looks for his indemnification. On the same side follows Polonius Arthur Young, the unutterable sta- tistical prattler. If we proceed further, and compare the process of producing value with the labour-process, pure and simple, we find that the latter consists of the useful labour, the work, that produces use-values. It would indicate that the 2 constituent parts of the working- day, necessary-labour and surplus-labour time, were equal in ex- tent, but not how long each of these two constituent parts was. How then can the spinner produce in one hour> in the shape of yarn, a value that embodies 5^- hours' labour? . xvi., p. of yarn, is represented by 13 -^ lbs. The differ- ence of these two sums, or the surplus-value, would still be £90. I., c. . "I assume, throughout, the state of things which, where the labourers and capitalists are separate classes, prevails, with few exceptions, universally; namely, that the capitalist advances the whole expenses, including the entire remuneration of the labourer." Strange optical illusion to see everywhere a state of things which as yet exists only exceptionally on our earth. With all its defects this Act, together with the Swiss Federal Factory Law of March 23, 1877, is still by far the best piece of leg- islation in this field. 5 I. Of course, this petty mode of production exists also under slavery, serfdom, and other states of dependence. or fall to 2s. It takes centuries ere the "free" labourer, thanks to the development of capitalistic production, agrees, i.e., is compelled by social conditions, to sell the whole of his active life, his very capacity for work, for the price of the necessaries of life, his birthright for a mess of pottage. The knell of capitalist private property sounds. Whether the coat serves as the equivalent and the linen as relative value, or the linen as the equivalent and the coat as relative value, the magni- tude of the coat's value is determined, independently of its value- form, by the labour-time necessary for its production. The Times reminded him of the manufacturers' revolt against the Ten Hours' Bill. In our for- mer assumption, according to which 6 working-hours are daily nec- essary in order to reproduce the labour-power itself or to replace the value of the capital advanced in its purchase, a variable capi- tal of 1,500s., that employs 500 labourers at a rate of surplus-value of 100% with a 12 hours' working-day, produces daily a surplus- val- ue of 1,500s. 11.) With reference to the labour of women, Saunders, the factory inspector, says in his report of 1844: "Amongst the female operatives there are some women who, for many weeks in succession, except for a few days, are employed from 6 a.m. till midnight, with less than 2 hours for meals, so that on 5 days of the week they have only 6 hours left out of the 24, for going to and from their homes and resting in bed." 404 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION The productiveness of machinery is, as we saw, inversely proportional to the value transferred by it to the product. 3 "Merchant Farms." "An Enquiry into the Causes of the Present High Price of Provisions." London, 1767, p. 220 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION One more example. With- out strength to endure such disproportionate toil, without instruction to guide their future life, they have been thrown into a situation physically and morally polluted. constitutes value." ("Money and its Vicissitudes." London, 1837, p. Their wonderful development from 1853 to 1860, hand-in-hand with the physical and moral regeneration of the factory workers, struck the most purblind. "On the Economy of Machinery," 1st ed. Thompson: 'An Inquiry into the Principles of the Distribution of Wealth." London, 1824, p. I., pp. c, p. It therefore by no means follows, that a rise in the value of money necessarily implies a proportional fall in the prices of commodities; or that a fall in the value of money implies a proportional rise in prices. On the other hand, the last report of the "Child. 1., 1863, p. Our friend, up to this time so purse- proud, suddenly assumes the modest demeanour of his own work- 1 "Extol thyself, put on finery and adorn thyself ... . of barlev- 1 1 meal, 7— d.; 5 lbs. The debts due to A from B, to B from C, to G from A, and so on, have only to be confronted with each other, in order to annul each other to a certain extent like positive and negative quantities. As the use-values, coat 1 Comp. About 70% of the workpeople examined declared in favour of 10 hours, a much smaller percentage in favour of 11, and an altogether insignificant minority for the old 12 hours. 48, 61.) In his "Three Lectures on the Rale of Wages," London, 1830, in which N. Along with the absolute magnitude of the latter, its relative magnitude also falls, i.e., its magnitude rela- tively to the value of labour-power whose magnitude remains unaltered. Almost the whole of the remaining 140,000 are women, young persons, and children of both sexes, the male sex, however, being weakly represented. of yarn, measuring 400 miles in length." (Reports of Insp. 20. We heard how over- work thinned the ranks of the bakers in London. All the doctors there agree that the increase of the death-rate through tuberculosis, scrofula, etc., increases in intensity with the deterioration of the physical condition of the population, and all ascribe this deterioration to poverty. The agricultural labourers were to hire themselves out by the year, the town ones u in open market." It was forbidden, under pain of imprisonment, to pay higher wages than those fixed by the statute, but the taking of higher wages was more severely punished than the giving them. Econ.," London, 1767, v. On the one hand, the longer the time neces- sary to spin a given weight of cotton into yarn, the greater is the new value added to the material; on the other hand, the greater the weight of the cotton spun in a given time, the greater is the value preserved, by being transferred from it to the product. 3 3 Cft co O ID •o <! SA O 3 3 O X CQ < X3 O 3 ^S No. 1. With each improvement in the machinery, it will employ fewer. 'Is it worth while keeping the machinery in order?' again asks Mr. Potter. The irrational, old-fashioned methods of agricul- ture are replaced by scientific ones. "He makes the primitive hunter and the primitive fizher straightway, as owners of commodities, ex- change fish and game in the proportion in which labour-time is incorporated in these exchange-values. 194, note.) 2 James Mill, 1. Twelve girls ironing and doing-up in a small room about 10 feet square, in the centre of which is a close stove. His aim is to produce not only a use-value, but a commodity also; not only use-value, but value; not only value, but at the same time surplus-value. Sewing thread . The scattered means of production that serve the producers themselves as means of employment and of subsistence, without expanding their own value by the incorporation of the labour of others, are no more capital than a product consumed by its own producer is a commodity. * But it is the former difference alone that determines the cost, to the capitalist, of producing a commodity, and, through the pressure of competition, influences his action. "No incon- venience," says Vanderlint, "can arise by an unrestrained trade, but very great advantage; since, if the cash of the nation be decreased by it, which prohibitions are designed to prevent, those nations that get the cash will certainly find everything advance in price, as the cash increases amongst them. 174 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION One consequence of the peculiar nature of labour-power as a commodity is, that its use-value does not, on the conclusion of the contract between the buyer and seller, immediately pass into the hands of the former. But although ignorant of this, yet he says it. Knight: What sorte is that which, ye sayde should have greater losse hereby, than these men had profit? 110, 111. THE WORKING-DAY 249 geniously put it, "sophisticated" goods. 150 sq.). "The first Spanish settlers in Saint Domingo did not obtain labourers from Spain. 3 The variety of the trans- ition forms, however, does not conceal the tendency to conversion into the factory system proper. Com. Babbage. 8.) "But let not the lovers of truth be discouraged. Although the absolute increase of the English population in the last half century was very great, the relative increase or rate of growth fell constantly, as the following table borrowed from the census shows. 1 Since the passing of the first Factory Act half a century had elapsed. iv., p. s Nasmyth, the inventor of the steam-hammer, gives the fol- lowing evidence before the Trades' Union Commission, with re- gard to the improvements made by him in machinery and intro- duced in consequence of the wide-spread and long strikes of the engineers in 1851. (1. I 1 Daily Telegraph, 17th January, 1860. c, p. "The Prussian factory operative labours at least ten hours per week more than his English competitor, and if employed at his own loom in his own house, his labour is not restricted to even those additional hours." ("Rep. Thus we see, that machinery, while augmenting the human material that forms the principal object of capital's exploiting power, 2 at the same time raises the degree of exploitation. Rep.," p. Be- tween 1815 and 1830 the competition with the continent of Europe and with the United States sets in. Education. The code of the corvee, which the Russian General Kisseleff proclaimed in 1831, was of course dictated by the Boyards themselves. Face to face with his underselling competitor, he even insists upon extra pay for this over-time. By means of advances, repayable in labour, which are handed down from generation to generation, not only the individual labourer, but his family, become, de facto, the prop- erty of other persons and their families. 1 "Le travail primitif auquelson capital a du sa naissance." Sismondi, 1. Thus do the children enjoy life till the age of 12 or 14. In the larger workshops of the London tailors, therefore, a certain piece of work, a waistcoat, e.g., is called an hour, or half an hour, the hour at 6d. Tre- menheere, also a member of the Commission of 1863 several times mentioned, was appointed Royal Commissioner of Inquiry. — In Marx's copy there is here the marginal note: "Here note for working out later; if the extension is only quantitative, then for a greater and a smaller capital in the same branch of business the profits are as the magnitudes of the capitals advanced. The law is satisfied, but is humanity?" Besides "the destruc- tive influence of night-labour on the human organism," stress is also laid upon "the fatal influence of the association of the two sexes by night in the same badly-lighted workshops." 3 "For instance, there is within my district one occupier who, within the same curtilage, is at the same time a bleacher and dyer under the Bleaching and Dyeing Works Act, a printer under the Print Works Act, and a finisher under the Factory Act." (Report of Mr. Baker, in Reports, &c, for October 31st, 1861, p. j - the denominator increases, the numer- working-day ' ator increases yet more rapidly. And yet the conditions of service were at times better after the war than 100 years later; the farm servants of Silesia had, in 1652, meat twice a week, w T hilst even in our century, districts are known where they have it only three times a year. would suffice for such revolutions and circulations thereof, as trade requires," Petty replies in his usual masterly manner, "I answer yes: for the expense being 40 millions, if the revolutions 142 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION The development of money into a medium of payment makes it necessary to accumulate money against the dates fixed for the payment of the sums owing. We have seen how the forcible usurpation of this, generally accompanied by the turning of arable into pasture land, begins at the end of the 15th and extends into the 16th century. . An increase occurred in the cultivation of green crops, turnips, mangold-wurzel, and the like; a decrease in the area under cultiva- tion for wheat of 16,000 acres; oats, 14,000; barley and rye, 4,000; potatoes, 66,632; flax, 34,667; grass, clover, vetches, rape-seed, 30,000. The never-ending augmentation of exchange-value, which the miser strives after, by seeking to save 3 his money from circulation, is attained by the more acute capitalist, by constantly throwing it afresh into circula- tion. 4 Reports, &c, I. Their heavy day's work at length completed, they put on better clothes, and accompany the men to the public houses. Abundant material relating to these facts, which are concealed by official Political Economy, is to be found in the Reports of the Inspectors of Facto- ries, of the Children's Employment Commission, and more especially in the Reports on Public Health. I know nothing of a man, by knowing that his name is Jacob. of yarn, our first step is to calculate the quantity of labour real- ised in it. Mr. Villiers, despite the best of intentions on his part, was "le- gally" obliged to refuse the requests of the manufacturers. Definite quantities of product, these quantities being determined by ex- perience, now represent nothing but definite quantities of labour, definite masses of crystallised labour-time. 2 "Machinery ...can frequently not be employed until labour (he means wages) rises." (Ricardo, 1. . 2 What flows back to the labourer in the shape of wages is a portion of the product that is continuously reproduced 1 "Mais ces riches, qui consomment les produits du travail des aut- res, ne peuvent les obtenir que par des echanges [purchases of commodities]. Its functions can be exercised only in an environment that exists in the workshop of the capitalist after the sale. . 2 Rents, taxes, and such like payments are transformed from payments in kind into money payments. A few months later, an individual named Robinson, also a cotton-spinner, and if not his Man Friday, at all events related to Eskrigge, appeared before the borough ma- gistrates of Stockport on a charge of introducing the identical plan of relays invented by Eskrigge. c, pp. On the other hand, "machinery can seldom be used with success to abridge the labour of an individual; more time would be lost in its construction than could be saved by its application. Consequently, al- though, like all other commodity-producing labour, it is the labour of private individuals, yet, at the same time, it ranks as labour directly social in its character. c, p. 135,831 lbs. Linen = coat is the basis of the equation. There, the existence of the things qua commodities, and the value-relation between the products of labour which stamps them as commodities, have absolutely no connexion with their physical properties and with the material relations arising therefrom. This equivalent has no relative form of value in com- mon with other commodities, but its value is relatively expressed by a never ending series of other commodities. This process differs from the former in this, that it only pre-supposes a change in the distribution of capital already to hand, and func- tioning; its field of action is therefore not limited by the absolute growth of social wealth, by the absolute limits of accumulation. All surplus-value, whatever particular form (profit, interest, or rent), it may subsequently crystallise into, is in sub- stance the materialisation of unpaid labour. Souvent, dans la prevision d'un travail aleatoire, quelquefois meme imaginaire, on admet des ouvriers: comme on les paie aux pieces, on se dit qu'on ne court aucun risque, parce que toutes les partes de temps seront a la charge des inoccupes." (H. But, what is a working-day? If, under these circumstances, in consequence, for instance, of a poor crop of wool, the labour-time necessary 1 Value is here, as occasionally in the preceding pages, used in sense of value determined as to quantity, or of magnitude of value. There are exception- al cases in which the surplus-value produced does not increase in proportion to the number of labourers exploited, but then the value of the labour-power does not remain constant. P. M. 424 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION is elaborated into a complete system in the factory, and which fully develops the before mentioned labour of overlooking, thereby dividing the workpeople into operatives and overlookers, into private soldiers and sergeants of an industrial army. l But the land requires cultivation, and it will be found that the labourers employed upon it are not the tenants of the owner, but that they come from a neighbouring open village, perhaps three miles off, where a numerous small proprietary had received them when their cottages were destroyed in the close villages around. 1 "Une richesse en argent n'est que... False weights and measures. The more or less favourable circumstances in which the wage-working class supports and multiplies itself, in no way alter the fundamental character of capitalist production. 20. Econ." 2nd ed., Lond.. Comm. Sanderson answers in the name of all the San- dersons: "It is true that there is this loss from machinery ly- ing idle in those manufactories in which work only goes on by day. 1 Nevertheless, the learned professor was not without some benefit from his journey to Manchester. lis durent done chercher dans le ciel un signe apparent de son retour." (Cuvier: "Discours sur les revolutions du globe," ed. But we follow him into the city or town, and we see the stress of work on that strong man, and what then is his position in the death- rate of his country. Such a furnace, with its 4-6 groups, constitutes a glass house; and a glass manufactory comprises a number of such glass nouses, together with the apparatus and workmen requisite for the preparatory and final stages. SECTION 4.— DIVISION OF LABOUR IN MANUFACTURE, AND DIVISION OF LABOUR IN SOCIETY We first considered the origin of Manufacture, then its sim- ple elements, then the detail labourer and his implements, and finally, the totality of the mechanism. Relative surplus-population is therefore the pivot upon which the law of demand and supply of labour works. 38, n. 308.) EXPROPRIATION OF AGRICULTURAL POPULATION 721 a cottage on the manor of Front Mill without 4 acres of land at- tached to the same in perpetuity. But the difference is that in England, an industrial country, the indus- trial reserve recruits itself from the country districts, whilst in Ireland, an agricultural country, the agricultural reserve recruits itself from the towns, the cities of refuge of the expelled agricul- tural labourers. The Indian loom is upright, i.e., the warp is stretched vertically. 3 5 8 No. 7. . 2 The reader must note that we are not speaking here of the wages or value that the labourer gets for a given labour-time, but of the value of the commodity in which that labour-time is materialised. 523.) 2 Buchez et Roux: "Histoire Parlementaire," t. 111.) MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 483 combining education and gymnastics 1 with manual labour, and, consequently, of combining manual labour with education and gymnastics. That identity further implies that the exchange, if it do take place, constitutes a period of rest, an interval, long or short, in the life of the com- modity. He was not the same as other people in some ways, because he was religious in some ways, and others isn't." (1. On the one hand, it was to the interest of the middle-class agitators to prove how little the Corn Laws protected the actual producers of the corn. Anyhow the full-priced also, as was mentioned above, and as their spokes- man, Bennett, himself admits, make their men "generally begin work at 11 p. The action of the law of supply and demand of labour on this basis completes the despotism of capital. An Act to limit the hours of labour, &c, § 1 and 2. Whereas our youth, here in England, being bred to nothing before they come to be apprentices, make a very slow progress and require much longer time wherein to reach the perfection of accomplished artists." 2 1 W. The isolated expres- sion of A's value, is therefore convertible into a series, prolonged to any length, of the different elementary expressions of that value. His economic bondage 3 is both brought about and concealed by the periodic sale of 1 Parliament did not vote a single farthing in aid of emigration, but simply passed some Acts empowering the municipal corporations to keep the operatives in a half-starved state, i.e., to exploit them at less than the normal wages. "The physical appearance of the cotton operatives is unquestionably improved. Let us now assume, that the productiveness of the spinner's labour, instead of varying, remains constant, that he therefore requires the same time as he formerly did, to convert one pound of cotton into yarn, but that the exchange-value of the cotton varies, either by rising to six times its former value or falling to one-sixth of that value. xlvii. And since sales and purchases are negotiated solely between par- ticular individuals, it is not admissible to seek here for relations between whole social classes. There can be no greater error than in supposing that capital is increased by non-consumption." 4 There can be no greater error than that which Ricardo and all subsequent economists repeat after A. Of this sum, twelve shillings belong to the value of the means of produc- tion, a value that merely re-appears. But the conservative interests, which Malthus served, prevented him from seeing that an unlimited prolongation of the working-day, combined with an extraordinary development of machinery, and the exploitation of women and children, must inevitably have made a great portion of the working- class "supernumerary," particularly whenever the war should have ceased, and the monopoly of England in the markets of the world should have come to an end. Labour-power, however, becomes a reality only by its exercise; it sets itself in action only by working. 11,722,182 yds. In this sense it is that surplus-labour can be called unpaid labour. Lastly, in the case of in- terest-bearing capital, the circulation M — C — M' appears abridged. Rogier, the minister, informed me that children's labour is limited neither by a general law nor by any local regulations; that the Government, during the last three years, intended in every session to propose a bill on the subject, but always found an insuperable obstacle in the jealous opposition to any legislation in con- tradiction with the principle of perfect freedom of labour." 278 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION SECTION 6.— THE STRUGGLE FOR THE NORMAL WORKING-DAY. But when we buy in order to sell, we, on the contrary, begin and end with the same thing, money, exchange-value; and thereby the movement becomes interminable. The prim- itive industrial capital, here, came in part directly out of the state treasury. . In one operation he must exert more strength, in another more skill, in another more attention; and the same indi- vidual does not possess all these qualities in an equal degree. How little his book, which appeared ten years before the "Wealth of Nations," is known, even at the present time, may be judged from the fact that the admirers of Malthus do not even know that the first edition of the latter's work on population contains, except in the purely declamatory part, very little but extracts from Steuart, and in a less degree, from Wallace and Townsend. As the value of the raw material may change, so, too, may that of the instruments of labour, of the machinery, &c, em- ployed in the process; and consequently that portion of the value of the product transferred to it from them, may also change. On this assumption, labour-power can appear upon the market as a commodity, only if, and so far as, its pos- sessor, the individual whose labour-power it is, offers it for sale, or sells it, as a commodity. the Congress proposes eight hours as the le- gal limit of the working-day." Thus the movement of the working-class on both sides of the Atlantic, that had grown instinctively out of the conditions of production themselves, endorsed the words of the English Factory Inspector, R. c, p. This time the pretext was "the delicate texture of the fabric in which they were employed, requiring a lightness of touch, only to be acquired by their early introduction to these .factories." 4 The children were slaughtered out-and-out for the sake of their delicate fingers, as in Southern Russia the horned cattle for the sake of their hide and tallow. They promised, therefore, not only a double-sized loaf of bread, but the enact- ment of the Ten Hours' Bill in the Free-trade millennium. Weaving, which is the labour of certain private individ- uals producing a particular article, linen, acquires in consequence a social character, the character of equality with all other kinds of labour. * The majority of the small mills were weaving sheds, built during the period of prosperity after 1858, for the most part by speculators, of whom one supplied the yarn, another the machinery, a third the buildings, and were worked by men who had been overlookers, or by other persons of small means. a week, and receiving from this poor hind £4 THE OENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 685 ing no fire-grate, no privy, no opening window, no water supply but the ditch, no garden — but the labourer is helpless against the wrong. "Nor is it a consequence that there must be depopulation, because men are not seen wasting their labour in the open field. 50-51.) The reports always go beyond their official dates. If, then, in form G we replace the linen by gold, we get, B. Even apart from this disproportion, the mere comparison of the rate of wages expressed in gold would give a result far from accurate. 1 We should, in this way, get £1,500 on one side and £1,590 on the other. The process of production, considered on the one hand as the unity of the labour-process and the process of creating value, is production of commodities; considered on the other hand as the unity of the labour-process and the process of producing sur- plus-value, it is the capitalist process of production, or capitalist production of commodities. [A nation] "never thrives better, than when riches are tost from hand to hand." (Sir Dudley North: "Discourses upon Trade," Lond. And why? . c, p. It will be remembered that on p. . Considerations of economy, more- over, which, under a natural system, afford some security for humane treatment by identifying the master's interest with the slave's preservation, when once trading in slaves is practised, become reasons for racking to the uttermost the toil of the slave; for, when his place can at once be supplied from foreign preserves, the duration of his life becomes a matter of less mo- ment than its productiveness while it lasts. It is otherwise with the "housing of the poor." Every unprejudiced observer sees that the greater the central- isation of the means of production, the greater is the correspond- ing heaping together of the labourers, within a given space; that therefore the swifter capitalistic accumulation, the more miserable are the dwellings of the working-people. So far as regards use-values, it is clear that both parties may gain some advantage. Fawcett, Professor of Political Economy at Cambridge. It does not therefore help matters one jot, to repeat in parrot fashion, that things have a tendency to find their level. The price of the cotton in April, 1871, was 7-r- d. 1 As soon as this process of transformation has sufficiently de composed the old society from top to bottom, as soon as the la- bourers are turned into proletarians, their means of labour into capital, as soon as the capitalist mode of production stands on 1 "Nous sommes dans une condition tout-a-fait nouvelle de la so- ciete... If there be no change in the length of the working- day, the surplus-labour would fall from 6 hours to 4, the surplus- value from 3 shillings to 2. Objects that in themselves are no commodities, such as conscience, honour, &c, are capable of being offered for sale by their holders, and of thus acquiring, through their price, the form of commodities. 1 With English writers the confusion between measure of value and standard of price (standard of value) is indescribable. Let us examine the matter more closely. Either because the capitalist uses it as a pretext for actu- ally lowering the price of labour, or because increased productive power of labour is accompanied by an increased intensity of the same. . To the like effect, but with an opposite tendency: "Working-men are driven from their cottages and forced into the towns to seek for employment; but then a larger surplus is obtained, an thus capital is augmented." ("The Perils of the Nation," 2nd ed. Arthur Young in his "Tour in Ireland," at the beginning of this century, already noticed the better nour- ishment of the latter. Saunders: "Further steps towards a reformation of society can never be carried out with any hope of success, unless the hours of labour be limited, and the pre- scribed limit strictly enforced." 2 It must be acknowledged that our labourer comes out of the process of production other than he entered. . This was the origin of the additional Factory Act of June 7th, 1844. Alongside of the hie- rarchic gradation there steps the simple separation of the labour- ers into skilled and unskilled. a proscribed race." 2 The first act of the agricultural revolution was to sweep away the huts situated on the field of labour. If any of the poor perish under the contractor's care, the sin will lie at his door, as the parish will have done its duty by them. c, p. Therefore, although we may be aware that gold is money, and consequently directly exchangeable for all other commodities, yet that fact by no means tells how much 10 lbs., for instance, of gold is worth. (n. These statistics gave 1 "Tenth Report of the Commissioners of H. They may both simultaneously in- crease from 3 shillings to 4. But there is another point to be considered in our calculation. of Fact., 31st Oct., 1866," pp. That he may live only twice as well as an ordinary labourer, and besides turn half of the surplus-value produced into capital, he would have to raise, with the number of labourers, the minimum of the capital advanced 8 times. A deer-forest in place of a sheep-walk was a common change in the Highlands. 1 "Le prix d'une marchandise ne pouvant etre paye que par le prix d'une autre marchandise." (Mercier de la Riviere: "L'Ordre naturel et esseu- tiel de societes politiques." Physiocrates, ed Daire II. 4 Price, 1. "The operatives have been greatly disap- pointed... 2 "Rep. . But as regards labour in the so-called domestic industries and the intermediate forms between them and Manufacture, so soon as limits are put to the working-day and to the employment of children, those in- dustries go to the wall. Starting from this basis, Storch naively con- fesses, "II est impossible de resoudre le prix necessaire dans ses elements les plus simples." (Storch, I.e., Petersb. . But such a degree of development is common to many forms of society, which in other respects present the most varying histori- cal features. As with the stroke of an enchanter's wand, it endows barren money with the power of breeding and thus turns it into capital, without the necessity of its exposing itself to the troubles and risks inseparable from its employment 1 William Cobbett remarks that in England all public institutions are designated "royal"; as compensation for this, however, there is the "national" debt. 24; p. The diversity of these measures has its origin partly in the di- verse nature of the objects to be measured, partly in convention. He vanishes from the labour-market, but not into the workhouse. Let us suppose that, as the result of experience, a labourer who works with the average amount of intensity and skill, who, therefore, gives in fact only the time so- cially necessary to the production of an article, supplies in 12 hours 24 pieces, either distinct products or measurable parts of a contin- uous whole. Besides, to this category belong also such old plantations as those in which the abolition of slavery has completely altered the earlier conditions. c, p. 1866, app., pp. V. The manufacturers, however, did not allow this "progress" without a compensating "retrogression." At their instigation the House of Commons reduced the minimum age for exploit- able children from 9 to 8, in order to assure that additional sup- ply of factory children which is due to capitalists, according to divine and human law. c, pp. The theoretical part of this book, a kind of hand-book of Political Economy, is, consider- ing the time of its publication, original in some parts, e.g., on commercial crises. To what an extent the old forms of the instru- ments of production influenced their new forms at first starting, is shown by, amongst other things, the most superficial comparison of the present power- loom with the old one, of the modern blowing apparatus of a blast-furnace with the first inefficient mechanical reproduction of the ordinary bellows, and perhaps more strikingly than in any other way, by the attempts before the invention of the present locomotive, to construct a locomotive that actu- ally had two feet, which after the fashion of a horse, it raised alternately from the ground. 2 As on our hypothesis he must work on the average 6 hours daily, in order to produce a day's wage corresponding merely to the value of his la- bour-power, as according to the same hypothesis he works only half of every hour for himself, and half for the capitalist, it is 1 This is perceived by the fanatical representative of the industrial bourgeoisie of the 18th century, the author of the "Essay on Trade and Com- merce" often quoted by us, although he puts the matter in a confused way: "It is the quantity of labour and not the price of it (he means by this the nominal daily or weekly wages) that is determined by the price of provi- sions and other necessaries: reduce the price of necessaries very low, and of course you reduce the quantity of labour in proportion. But he himself takes care to let both beast and implement feel that he is none of them, but is a man. includes the whole labour of the engineer, not a portion; for one machine CONSTANT CAPITAL AND VARIABLE CAPITAL 205 On the other hand, a means of production may take part as a whole in the formation of value, while into the labour-process it enters only bit by bit. 82, note.) Very true, Mr. Professor! the oil produced by the oil mill is indeed something very different from the labour expended in constructing the mill! By value, Mr. Roscher understands such stuff as "oil," because oil has value, notwithstand- ing that "Nature" produces petroleum, though relatively "in small quanti- ties," a fact to which he seems to refer in his further observation: "It (Nature) produces scarcely any exchange-value." Mr. Roscher's "Nature" and the ex- change-value it produces are rather like the foolish virgin who admitted in- deed that she had had a child, but "it was such a little one." This "savant serieux" in continuation remarks: "Ricardo's school is in the habit of in- cluding capital as accumulated labour under the head of labour. of cotton, together with one-fourth of a spindle. The subject of labour is in this case not a product of previous labour, but is furnished by Nature gratis, as in the case of metals, minerals, coal, stone, &c. It will be remembered that the rate of surplus-value depends, in the first place, on the degree of exploitation of labour-power. c, p. 39,561 St. 3,068,707 ts. viii. The British Parliament proclaimed blood-hounds and scalping as "means that God and Nature had given into its hand." The colonial system ripened, like a hot-house, trade and navigation. On the other hand, he can withdraw from circulation no more than what he has thrown into it in the shape of commodities. 1848," p. Accumulation of wealth at one pole is, therefore, at the same time accumulation of misery, agony of toil, slavery, ignorance, brutality, mental degradation, at the opposite pole, i.e., on the side of the class that produces its own product in the form of capital. In all such cases, there must be the possibility of throwing great masses of men suddenly on the decisive points without injury to the scale of production in other spheres. of Fact, for 31st Oct. She is also cook, and all the servant we have. The portion of the capital invested in the pur- chase of labour-power is a definite quantity of materialised labour, a constant value like the value of the labour-power purchased. . 1634.) "Would you lay that obligation upon the colliers only, or all the work- people of Great Britain?" "I came to speak for the colliers." (n. F. o. 17, as follows: That the produce of land increases, cseteris paribus, in a diminishing ratio to the increase of the labourers em- ployed' (Mill here introduces in an erroneous form the law enunciated by Ri- cardo's school, for since the 'decrease of the labourers employed,' kept even pace in England with the advance of agriculture, the law discovered in, and applied to, England, could have no application to that country, at all events), 'is the universal law of agricultural industry.' This is very remarkable, since Mill was ignorant of the reason for this law." (Liebig, 1. l 1 The advance of industry, whose involuntary promoter is the bour- geoisie, replaces the isolation of the labourers, due to competition, by their revolutionary combination, due to association. In 1854 the total sum of the exports and imports of the United Kingdom was £268,210,145; in 1865, £489,923,285. Each of these implies the corresponding inverted equation, 1 coat =20 yards of linen 10 lbs. c, vol. On l^his Rus- sian soil, so fruitful of all infamies, the old horrors of the early days of English factories are in full swing. In other respects, the Act only amended and completed the Acts of 1833 and 1844. It is in this sense that Franklin says, "war is robbery, commerce is generally cheat- ing." 2 If the transformation of merchants' money into cap- ital is to be explained otherwise than by the producers being simply cheated, a long series of intermediate steps would be necessary, which, at present, when the simple circulation of commodities forms our only assumption, are entirely want- ing. In the period of manufacture properly so called, it is, on the other hand, the commercial supremacy that gives industrial pre- dominance. 443.) "But are they (the employers) not compelled to demand them (school certificates)?" "By law they are; but I am not aware that they are demanded by the employers." "Then it is your opinion, that this provision of the Act as to requiring certificates, is not generally carried out in the collieries?" "It is not carried out." (ns. In their difficulties our commodity- owners think like Faust: "Im Anfang war die That." They therefore acted and transacted before they thought. . For this purpose they use two different sets of workers, of whom neither is in the work- shop more than 12 hours at a time, but the work of the establishment lasts day and night. Accompanied by Mr. Moneybags and by the possessor of labour-power, we therefore take leave for a time of this noisy sphere, where everything takes place on the surface and in view of all men, and follow them both into the hidden abode of production, on whose threshold there stares us in the face "No admittance except on business." Here we shall see, not only how capital produces, but how capital is produced. 9, 11. The function of gold as coin becomes completely independent of the metallic value of that gold. 1 cruelty reigns here in England among the men of trade, that is not to be met with in any other society of men, nor in any other kingdom of the world." ("An Essay on Credit and the Bankrupt Act," Lond., 1707, p. Years ago we were always able to work in the slack times, so as to meet the demand of the next season, but now no one can say beforehand what will be the demand then." 1 In those factories and manufactories that are not yet subject to the Factory Acts, the most fearful over-work prevails peri- odically during what is called the season, in consequence of sud- den orders. In the few remarks I have still to make on this point, I shall refer to some actually existing relations, the existence of which our theoretical investigation has not yet disclosed. . 1 We have one close at hand in the patriae 1 "A ridiculous presumption has latterly got abroad that common prop- erty in its primitive form is specifically a Slavonian, or even exclusively Russian form It is the primitive form that we can prove to have existed amongst Romans, Teutons, and Celts, and even to this day we iind numerous 78 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION chal industries of a peasant family, that produces corn, cattle, yarn, linen, and clothing for home use. The best of it is that he does not assert that things actually are as they ought to be accord- ing to his theory. The younger boys are chiefly employed in opening and shutting the ventilating doors in the various parts of the mine; the older ones 498 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION are employed on heavier work, in carrying coal, &c. The price-form of the linen is therefore 20 yards of linen =2 ounces of gold, or, if 2 ounces of gold when coined are £2, 20 yards of linen =£2. . This product is the transformed shape of the commodity, or its gold-chrysalis. c, P . Living labour must seize upon these things and rouse them from their death-sleep, change them from mere possible use-values into real and effective ones. consists of wealth saved from revenue, and used with a view to profit." (R Jones: "An Introductory Lecture on Polit. In an interview with the Home Secretary (1844), the factory inspectors demonstrated the impossibility of any control under the newly invented relay system. Red- grave, factory inspector, illustrates this by a comparative review of the 20 years from 1839-1859, according to which wages rose in the factories under the 10 hours' law, whilst they fell in the facto- ries in which the work lasted 14 to 15 hours daily. l In spite of the smaller number of its cultivators, the soil brought forth as much or more produce, after as before, because the revo- lution in the conditions of landed property was accompanied by improved methods of culture, greater co-operation, concentra- tion of the means of production, &c, and because not only were the agricultural wage-labourers put on the strain more intensely, 2 but the field of production on which they worked for themselves, became more and more contracted. 143,996,773 lbs. And since, in the form of circulation now under consideration, money and commodities always come bodily face to face, one at the pos- itive pole of purchase, the other at the negative pole of sale, it is clear that the amount of the means of circulation required, is determined beforehand by the sum of the prices of all these com- modities. "Another cause of idleness in this king- dom is the want of a sufficient number of labouring hands.... Our capitalist stares in astonishment. It was but quite recently struck out of the Penal Code. This is the case not only with all production on a large scale, whether employing machinery or not, but also with the so-called domestic industry, whether carried on in the houses of the workpeople or in small workshops. These letters originally appeared in The Times. But the agricultural year in Wallachia num- bers in consequence of the severe climate only 210 days, of which 40 for Sundays and holidays, 30 on an average for bad weather, together 70 days, do not count. When in currency, they wear away even more rapidly than gold coins. * In the mean- time, however, circumstances had greatly changed. possesses a value of 3s. Econ." Andover and New York, lfc35, p. C, 27th April, 1863.) SIMPLE REPRODUCTION 575 emigration, he has a right to be heard, and perhaps to protest." Mr. Potter then shows how useful the cotton trade is, how the "trade has undoubtedly drawn the surplus-population from Ireland and from the agricultural districts," how immense is its extent, how in the year 1860 it yielded -r^ ths of the total English exports, how, after a few years, it will again expand by the extension of the mar- ket, particularly of the Indian market, and by calling forth a plen- tiful supply of cotton at 6d. This narrowness is reflected in the ancient worship of Nature, and in the other elements of the popular reli- gions. 3,467,659 . Wages fall, and now we have the reverse of the medal. c, Vol. He wishes, on the contrary, to increase their wants and to make the increasing number of their wants a stimulus to their labour for the "more delicate." ■ Storch, 1. But, at that time, the process was carried on by means of individual acts of violence against which legislation, for a hundred and fifty years, fought in vain. The maintenance and reproduction of the working-class is, and must ever be, a necessary condition to the reproduction of capital. So soon, however, as products once become commodities in the external relations of a community, they also, by reaction, become so in its internal intercourse. were driven to commit sui- cide . 123). 3 How was it possible to control a system which, "under the guise of relays, is some one of the many plans for shuffling 'the hands' about in endless variety, and shifting the hours of work and of rest for different individuals through- out the day, so that you may never have one complete set of hands working together in the same room at the same time." 4 But altogether independently of actual over-work, this so- called relay system was an offspring of capitalistic fantasy such as Fourier, in his humorous sketches of "Courtes Seances," has never surpassed, except that the "attraction of labour" was changed into the attraction of capital. 543.) 8 "Ce ne sont pas les contractants qui prononcent sur la valeur; elle est decidee avant la convention." (Le Trosne, p. We have only to read the quotations of a price-list backwards, to find the magnitude of the value of money expressed in all sorts of commodities. 92 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION place at the source of its production by means of barter. l Commodities are thus sold not for the purpose of buying others, but in order to replace their commodity-form by their money-form. MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 495 The Inquiry Commission of 1840 had made revelations so terrible, so shocking, and creating such a scandal all over Europe, that to salve its conscience Parliament passed the Mining Act of 1842, in which it limited itself to forbidding the employment underground in mines of children under 10 years of age and fe- males. . Econ., Partic- ularly Relating to Value," p. And what, if you please, is this "legitimate part," which on your own showing the capitalist in Europe daily neglects to pay? 1 room 16 persons Lumley Street, No. 13 . The production of absolute surplus-value turns exclusively upon the length of the working-day; the production of relative surplus-value, revolutionises out and out the technical processes of labour, and the composition of society. 75.) EXPROPRIATION OF AGRICULTURAL POPULATION 725 demands a "general Act of Parliament for the enclosure of Com- mons" (admitting thereby that a parliamentary coup d'etat is necessary for its transformation into private property), and more- over calls on the legislature for the indemnification for the expropriated poor. Some part of the work is very hard; some of these girls have raised as much as 10 tons of stuff a day." (ns. COMPULSORY LAWS FOR THE EXTENSION OF THE WORKING-DAY FROM THE MIDDLE OF THE 14TH TO THE END OF THE 17TH CENTURY "What is a working-day? We are only asking what is right in requesting the masters generally to pursue a system of short hours, particularly until a better state of things begins to dawn upon us, rather than to work a por- tion of the hands over-time, while others, for want of work, are com- pelled to exist upon charity." ("Reports of Insp, of Fact., Oct. Between 1861 and 1870 the number of male servants nearly doubled itself. Ricardo has, it may be noted in passing, tried in vain to make clear to J. The linen, by virtue of the form of its value, now stands in a social relation, no longer with only one other kind of commodity, but with the whole world of commodities. THE MODERN THEORY OF COLONISATION 769 and their employers who combine capital and labour in particular works. I used to cry with sore feet every night last winter." G. (See John Fullarton, "Regu- lation of Currencies." Lond. In the former case the capitalist squanders the whole surplus-value in dissipation, in the latter he demonstrates his bourgeois virtue by consuming only a portion of it and converting the rest into money. It did not yet stand on that height of civilisation where the "wealth of the na- tion" (i.e., the formation of capital, and the reckless exploita- tion and impoverishing of the mass of the people) figure as the ultima Thule of all state-craft. In silk factories, for instance, there were in 1856, spindles 1,093,799; in 1862, 1,388,544; in 1856, looms 9,260; in 1862, 10,709. The new nobility was the child of its time, for which money was the power of all powers. . But as soon as the question of property crops up, it becomes a sacred duty to pro- claim the intellectual food of the infant as the one thing fit for all ages and for all stages of development. If the rate of wages is such as to THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION gig more or less favourable to the labourer, include therefore the ne- cessity of its constant re-selling, and the constantly extended reproduction of all wealth in the shape of capital. . That this same labour is, on the other hand, the universal value-creating element, and thus possesses a property by 1 The Morning Star, a London Free-trade organ,, naif to silliness, protested again and again during the American Civil War, with all the moral indignation of which man is capable, that the negro in the "Confederate States" worked absolutely for nothing. He knows that when a long period of time is taken, commodities are sold neither over nor under, but at their average price. The antagonism between the relative form of value and the 68 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION equivalent form, the two poles of the value-form, is developed concurrently with that form itself. In the midst of our West European society, where the labourer purchases the right to work for his own livelihood only by paying for it in surplus-labour, the idea easily takes root that it is an inherent quality of human labour to furnish a surplus-product. 13-14, 20 and 1852, p. A mass of free proletarians was hurled on the labour-market by the breaking-up of the bands of feudal retainers, who, as Sir James Steuart well says, "everywhere uselessly filled house and castle." Although the royal power, itself a product of bourgeois develop- ment, in its strife after absolute sovereignty forcibly hastened on the dissolution of these bands of retainers, it was by no means the sole cause of it. On the one hand, therefore, with the progress of accumula- tion, a larger variable capital sets more labour in action without enlisting more labourers; on the other, a variable capital of the same magnitude sets in action more labour with the same mass of labour-power; and finally, a greater number of inferior labour- powers by displacement of higher. The money with which such a class is constantly making purchases, must constantly flow into their pockets, without any exchange, gratis, by might or right, from the pockets of the commodity-owners themselves. . But Hercules shall hear the cry of the oxen and of his pris- oners, and shall seek Cacus even in cliffs and among rocks, and shall set the oxen loose again from the villain. First, he must create for the capitalist "capital," with which the latter may be able to exploit more labourers; then he must place, at his own expense, a locum tenens on the labour-market, whom the Government for- wards across the sea for the benefit of his old master, the capi- talist. Hence the production of raw material must be quadrupled. Each of these families had less space than is considered necessary for a convict. The force of facts, however, com- pelled it at last to acknowledge that modern industry, in over- turning the economic foundation on which was based the tradi- tional family, and the family labour corresponding to it, had also unloosened all traditional family ties. Those sober virtuosi of Protestantism, the Puritans of New England, in 1703, by decrees of their assembly set a premium of £40 on every Indian scalp and every captured red-skin: in 1720 a pre- mium of £100 on every scalp; in 1744, after Massachusetts-Bay had proclaimed a certain tribe as rebels, the following prices: for a male scalp of 12 years and upwards £100 (new currency), for a male prisoner £105, for women and children prisoners £50, for scalps of women and children £50. societe formee il n'y a pas de surabondant en aucun genre." At the same time, in a bantering way, he remarks: "If both the per- sons who exchange receive more to an equal amount, and part with less to an equal amount, they both get the same." It is because Condillac has not the remotest idea of the nature of exchange-value that he has been chosen by Herr Professor Wilhelm Roscher as a proper person to answer for the sound- ness of his own childish notions. "Very natural it is that they should do so.... It is therefore impossible that outside the sphere of circu- lation, a producer of commodities can, without coming into con- tact with other commodity-owners, expand value, and conse- quently convert money or commodities into capital. The workman ... 124, p. SECTION 3.— SEPARATION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO CAPITAL AND REVENUE. On these occasions the notes have a single and speci t- ic function to perform, and so soon as they have performed it, they flow back into the various banks from which they issued. ' 2 Dr. R. . 155, Forster, Addington, Kent, Price, and James Anderson, should be read and compared with the miserable prattle of Sycophant MacCulloch in his catalogue: "The Literature of Political Econo- my," London, 1845. 544. . For- merly the individual work of a Nuremberg artificer, the watch has been transformed into the social product of an immense number of detail labourers, such as mainspring makers, dial makers, spi- ral spring makers, jewelled hole makers, ruby lever makers, hand makers, case makers, screw makers, gilders, with numerous sub- divisions, such as wheel makers (brass and steel separate), pin mak- ers, movement makers, acheveur de pignon (fixes the wheels on the axles, polishes the facets, &c), pivot makers, planteur de fmis- sage (puts the wheels and springs in the works), finisseur de baril- let (cuts teeth in the wheels, makes the holes of the right size, &c), escapement makers, cylinder makers for cylinder escape- ments, escapement wheel makers, balance wheel makers, raquette makers (apparatus for regulating the watch), the planteur d'ech- appement (escapement maker proper); then the repasseur de ba- rillet (finishes the box for the spring, &c), steel polishers, wheel polishers, screw polishers, figure painters, dial enamellers (melt the enamel on the copper), fabricant de pendants (makes the ring by which the case is hung), finisseur de charniere (puts the brass hinge in the cover, &c), faiseur de secret (puts in the springs that open the case), graveur, ciseleur, polisseur de boite, &c, &c, and last of all the repasseur, who fits together the whole watch and DIVISION OF LABOUR AND MANUFACTURE 343 hands it over in a going state. i., p. Note in the 3rd German edition: To-day, thanks to the competition on the world-market, established since then, we have advanced much further. There also I return to the condition of the small farmers and the agricultural labour- ers. And here we have sales (by the owners of commodities) without purchases (by the owners of gold or silver). London, 1689, p. A portion of the latter was now added to the profits of the farm. This contradiction comes to a head in those phases of indus- trial and commercial crises which are known as monetary crises. These were to some extent inflicted as a penalty for defects in the finished article that were really due to his bad cotton and to his unsuitable machinery. as a main governing condition in the household circumstances of agricultural la- bour .... I demand, therefore, a work- ing-day of normal length, and I demand it without any appeal to your heart, for in money matters sentiment is out of place. This same Mr. Watts earlier traded in Owenism and published in 1842 another pamphlet: "Facts and Fictions of Political Economists," in which among other things he declares that "prop- erty is robbery." That is long ago. The manufacturer in large towns could evade the law, the manufacturer in country districts could not find the people necessary for the relay system, still less for the shifting of hands from one factory to another," &c. Since no commodity can stand in the relation of equiva- lent to itself, and thus turn its own bodily shape into the expres- sion of its own value, every commodity is compelled to choose some other commodity for its equivalent, and to accept the use- value, that is to say, the bodily shape of that other commodity as the form of its own value. On Rente London, 1831, P- 191 -) 2 "La lorza di ciascuno uomo e minima, ma la riunione delle minime forze forma una forza totale maggiore anche della somma delle forze mede- si me fino a che le forze per essere ri unite possono diminuere il tempo ed accres- cere lo spazio della loro azione." (G. a week." 2 In spite of legislation, the number of boys sold in Great Britain by their parents to act as live chimney-sweeping machines (although there exist plenty of machines to replace them) exceeds 2,000. The difference strikes one at once, even in those cases where man himself continues to be the prime mover. The ship- wrights of the port of London work by the job or piece, while those of all other parts work by the day." 2 In the same saddlery shops of London, often for the same work, piece-wages are paid to the French, time-wages to the Eng- lish. We are here no more concerned about the facts, that the labour is the specific work of spinning, that its subject is cotton and its product yarn, than we are about the fact that the subject itself is already a product and therefore raw material. The spinner produces in 12 hours 20 lbs. We have seen how the progressive development of a society of commodity-producers stamps one privileged com- modity with the character of money. Side by side with the masses thus occupied with one and the same work, we find the "chief inhabitant," who is judge, police, and tax-gatherer in one; the book-keeper, who keeps the accounts of the tillage and registers everything relating thereto; another official, who prosecutes criminals, protects strangers travelling through and escorts them to the next village; the boundary man, who guards the boundaries against neighbouring communities; the water-overseer, who distributes the water from the common tanks for irrigation; the Brahmin, who conducts the religious services; the schoolmaster, who on the sand teaches the children reading and writing; the calendar-Brahmin, or astrologer, who makes known the lucky or unlucky days for seed-time and harvest, and for every other kind of agricultural work; a smith and a carpenter, who make and repair all the agricultural implements; the potter, who makes all the pottery of the village; the barber, the washerman, who washes clothes, the silversmith, here and there the poet, who 1 "On peut ... At last the critical point was reached. "Over-population and its Remedy." 1. 16. Machinery, simultaneously with the increasing use of it, in the first decades of this century, appropriated, by degrees, the fabrication of machines proper. Whoever, therefore, exposes the real state of things in the capitalistic em- ployment of machinery, is against its employment in any way, and is an enemy of social progress! 1 Exactly the reasoning of the celebrated Bill Sykes. It is self- evident, that if a constant quantity consists of two parts, neither of them can increase without the other diminishing. At the same time, the interminable series of value equations implies, that as regards the value of a commodity, it is a matter of indifference under what particular form, or kind, of use-value it appears. This they call a temporary inconvenience." ("A Prize Essay on the Comparative Merits of Competition and Co-operation." Loud., 1834, p 29.) 432 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION The Governor General reported 1834-35: "The misery hardly finds a parallel in the history of commerce. 3,865,990 ts. 1865.-20,679,111 lbs. c, p. The other 200 are paid by the day, work equally long with the others, and get no more money for their over-time.... But suppose his product turn out a real use-value, MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OF COMMODITIES 107 and thereby attracts money? Only since 1853, in one single department — THE WORKING-DAY 279 They remained a dead Letter. Exertion to-day is 1 "A Dissertation on the Poor Laws. — F. 3 A. Thus the whole transaction would be reduced to a single act form- ing an isolated, non-complemented phase in the ordinary cir- culation of commodities, a mere sale from A's point of view, and from B's, a mere purchase. 15.) 2 "Children's Employment Com., III. Afterwards, in the last book which treats of the sources of public revenue, he occasionally repeats the denunciations of the division of labour made by his teacher, A. The swollen value of the yarn is of no avail, for it is merely the sum of the values formerly existing in the cotton, the spindle, and the labour-power: out of such a simple addition of existing values, no surplus-value can possibly arise. There the municipal philistine was just busied with urban improvements. 4 Merivale, 1. Look, for example, at those schemes of the masters which the "respectable" press praised as models of "what a reasonable degree of care and method can accomplish." The personnel of the workpeople was J Reports, &c, for 30th April, 1849, p. 648 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION separated from its recompense; it is not the same man that first works, and then reposes; but it is because the one works that the other rests. . Value of this description may be made to answer all the purposes of intrinsic value, and supersede even the necessity for a standard, provided only the quantity of issues be kept under due limitation." (Fullarton: "Regulation of Currencies," London, 1845, p. Soldier Working Coachmaker . The question therefore arises, how much money this sphere constantly absorbs? But all this does not alter the fact, that it is the labourer's own labour, realised in a product, which is advanced to him by the capitalist. Whether the value of cotton rise from one shilling to two shillings, or fall to sixpence, the workman invariably preserves in the product of one hour only one half as much value as he preserves in two hours. Machinery has executed, no doubt, the work that would demand the sinews of millions of men; but it has also prodigiously multiplied the labour of those who are governed by its fearful movements. 2 Linguet is probably right, when in his "Theorie des Lois Civiles," he declares hunting to be the first form of co-operation, and man-hunting (war) one of the earliest forms of hunting. 2,028,471 „ 12,184 „ Remainder of the to- tal yearly income 2,150,818,, 1,131 2,418,933,, 1,194 „ r 1,083,906 „ 910 ,. . x But this utility is not a thing of air. x With 1 The census of England and Wales shows: all persons employed in agriculture (landlords, farmers, gardeners, shepherds, &c, included): 1851, 2,011,447: 1861, 1,924,110. without remorse, make the omnibus drivers and conductors of London, &.C., work 16 hours a-day for the wages of a dog." Finally, spake the oracle, Thomas Carlyle, of whom I wrote, in 1850, "Zum Teufel ist der Genius, der Kultus ist geblieben." In a short parable, he reduces the one great event of contemporary history, the American Civ'.l War, to this level, that the Peter 256 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION done. On the other hand, after 1850, the speed of the spindles and looms was in many cases dou- bled. Moreover, the development of capitalist production makes it constantly necessary to keep in- creasing the amount of the capital laid out in a given industrial undertaking, and competition makes the immanent laws of capi- talist production to be felt by each individual capitalist, as external coercive laws. Labour transmits to its product the value of the means of production consumed by it. After the exchange we have still the same total value of £90. The bounty of Nature does not explain why he would then have to work 6 days a week, or why he must furnish 5 days of surplus-labour. London., 1843, p. — The "hopelessly bewildering tangle of contradictory enactments" (S. and beautifies the whole; altho more especially the particular persons that have it in plenty. They sent round to all the different banks to borrow, but could not get them, and many of the transactions were adjusted by slips of paper only; yet by three o'clock the whole of the notes were returned into the banks from which they had issued! It was a mere transfer from hand to hand." Although Hie average effective circulation of bank-notes in Scotland is less than three millions sterling, yet on certain pay days in the year, every single note in the possession of the bankers, amounting in the whole to about £7,000,000, is called into activity. of tea =40 lbs. If we now consider the case of any instrument of labour during the whole period of its service, from the day of its entry into the workshop, till the day of its banishment into the lumber room, we find that during this period its use-value has been completely consumed, and therefore its exchange-value completely transferred to the product. From a social point of view, the productiveness increases in the same ratio as the economy of labour, which, in its turn, includes not only economy of the means of production, but also the avoidance of all useless labour. This form of value is elementary and the same for all, therefore general. of Insp. of linen, 20 yds. Dye stuffs and other auxiliary substances also vanish but re-appear as properties of the product. The assignats Committee, in its report of April, 1854, gives him a severe snubbing Whether he also received the traditional drub- bing with bamboos is not stated. 19, forbad the destruction of all "houses of husbandry" to which at least 20 acres of land be- longed. But the value of a commodity repre- sents human labour in the abstract, the expenditure of human la- bour in general. A good description of the various forms of the Indian communities is to be found in George Campbell's "Modern In- dia." Lond., 1852. m., till 5 and 6 o'clock p. 13, and another of 1597. The reasoning is quite worthy of the man who first declared the relations of capitalist production to be eternal laws of Nature and reason, whose free, harmonious working is only disturbed by the intervention of the State, in or- der afterwards to discover that the diabolical influence of England on the world-market (an influence, which, it appears, does not spring from the natural laws of capitalist production) necessitates State intervention, i.e., the protection of those laws of Nature and reason by the State, alias the System of Protection. He pays them the value of 100 independent labour-powers, but he does not pay for the combined labour-power of the hundred. MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSRY 469 In 1861, there were 40,043 persons employed in straw-plaiting and straw-hat making; of these 3,815 were males of all ages, the rest females, of whom 14,913, including about 7,000 children, were under 20 years of age. I was the first to point out and to examine critically this two-fold nature of the labour contained in commodities. When it is considered what luxuries the manufacturing populace consume, such as brandy, gin, tea, sugar, foreign fruit, strong beer, printed linens, snuff, tobacco, &c." 3 He quotes the work of a Northamptonshire manufacturer, who, with eyes squinting heavenward, moans: "Labour is one- third cheaper in France than in England; for their poor work hard, and fare hard, as to their food and clothing. is the new value created during the spinning process: of this one half replaces the value of the day's labour-power, or the variable capital, the remaining half constitutes a surplus-value of 3s. 'The result of this change is not only that the class of town people is enormously increased, but the old close- packed little towns are now centres, built round on every side, open nowhere to air, and being no longer agreeable to the rich are abandoned by them for the pleasanter outskirts. In order then to be able to buy without selling, he must have sold previously without buying. 2 The 1 In the 12th century, so renowned tor its piety, they included amongst commodities some very delicate things. When viewed, therefore, as a con- nected whole, and as flowing on with incessant renewal, every social process of production is, at the same time, a process of re- production. The time is come when the great public opinion of these islands must operate to save this 'working power' from those who would deal with it as they would deal with iron, and coal, and cotton." The Times' article was only a jeu d' esprit. It proclaimed surplus-value making as the sole end and aim of humanity. It no longer suffices, therefore, that he should simply produce. The mining districts attract with rapidity a large population, made up of the miners them- selves, and the artisans, shopkeepers, &c, that group themselves around them. In one case 12 x 1,200 working- hours, and in the other 12 such hours are incorporated in the prod- uct. . If now its value fall, this fact is first evidenced by a change in the prices of those commodities that are directly bar- tered for the precious metals at the sources of their production. He finds but one answer: security! "Thanks to the advance of industry and science," says Sismondi, "every labourer can produce every day much more than his consumption requires. The fact that this minimum mass continually un- dergoes changes in its constituent parts, or that the pieces of gold of which it consists are being constantly replaced by fresh ones, causes of course no change either in its amount or in the continuity of its circulation. According to them, wages rise in consequence of accumulation of capital. A step further, and he will, perhaps, discover that the one evil in capitalist production is capital itself. A particular operation, though yesterday, perhaps, forming one out of the many operations conducted by one producer in creating a given commodity, may to-day separate itself from this connexion, may establish itself as an independ- ent branch of labour and send its incomplete product to market as an independent commodity. 1,299,893, but in 1858, 1,409,883. Relative surplus-value is absolute, since it compels the absolute prolongation of the work- ing-day beyond the labour-time necessary to the existence of the labourer himself. 27,533,968 yds. c, p. It alters only the proportion in which that surplus-value is divided between himself and third persons. 1 Let the necessary labour-time amount to 10 hours, the val- ue of a day's labour-power to five shillings, the surplus labour- time to 2 hours, and the daily surplus-value to one shilling. 4 "Questo infinito che le cose non hanno in progresso, hanno in giro." (Galiani.) 8 "Ce n'est pas la matiere qui fait le capital, mais la valeur de ces ma- lieres." (J. 3 Nevertheless, whether money serves as a means of 1 "All labour is paid after it has ceased." ("An Inquiry into those Prin- ciples Respecting the Nature of Demand," &c, p. A blunt knife or weak thread forcibly remind us of THE LABOUR-PROCESS 183 Mr. A., the cutler, or Mr. B., the spinner. The channel of circulation necessarily draws to itself a sum sufficient to fill it, and never admits any more." ("Wealth of Nations." Bk. IV., ch. 1 If the owner of labour- power works to-day, to-morrow he must again be able to repeat the same process in the same conditions as regards health and strength. We here leave out of consideration the portion of the surplus- value consumed by the capitalist. Production of surplus-value is the absolute law of this mode of production. Contrariwise, the movement of the means of payment expresses a social relation that was in existence long before. It obtained especially in East Germany. It is, besides, obvious that the rate of profit may depend on circum- stances that in no way affect the rate of surplus-value. 4 Thomas Wright: "A Short Address to the Public on the Monopoly of Large Farms," 1779, pp. When we speak of labour, or capacity for labour, we speak at the same time of the labourer and his means of subsist' ence, of labourer and wages." 1 When we speak of capacity for labour, we do not speak of labour, any more than when we speak of capacity for digestion, we speak of digestion. For the expro- priation of the agricultural population creates, directly, none but great landed proprietors. And this is the specific difference between centralisation and con- centration, the latter being only another name for reproduction on an extended scale. It therefore follows that the elemen- tary value-form is also the primitive form under which a product of labour appears historically as a commodity, and that the grad- ual transformation of such products into commodities, proceeds pari passu with the development of the value-form. In a very instructive work of the year 1777 we read: "The great farmer is nearly mounted to a level with him [the gentleman] ; while the poor labourer is depressed almost to the earth. That this credit is no mere fiction, is shown not only by the occasional loss of wages on the bankruptcy of the capitalist, 2 but also by a series of more enduring conse- quences. The move- ment of the commodity is therefore a circuit. Then another Act, The Mines' Inspecting Act of 1860, pro- vides that mines shall be inspected by public officers nominated specially for that purpose, and that boys between the ages of 10 and 12 years shall not be employed, unless they have a school certificate, or go to school for a certain number of hours. This led to the rise of a restored mercantile system (Ganilh, &c), which sees in value nothing but a social form, or rather the unsubstantial ghost of that form. The subdivision of labour is the assassination of a people." 3 Co-operation based on division of labour, in other words, manufacture, commences as a spontaneous formation. 5, 6. "The masters and their workmen are, unhappily, in a perpetual war with each other. The modern history of capital dates from the creation in the 16th century of a world-embracing commerce and a world-embracing market. c, p. 6,7. . It is impossible, for instance, to squeeze as much surplus-value out of 2 as out of 24 labourers. He requires also the means of subsistence. 12. We know, however, that, the values of commodities remaining constant, their prices vary with the value of gold (the material of money), rising in proportion as it falls, and falling in proportion as it rises. THE WORKING-DAY £85 They denounced the Factory Inspectors as a kind of revolutionary commissioners like those of the French National Convention ruth- lessly sacrificing the unhappy factory workers to their humani- tarian crotchet. The mechanism of the process of capi- talist production removes the very obstacles that it temporarily creates. Are you prepared to recommend legislation which would prevent the employment of children under 12 and 14, whatever the state of their parents might be?" "Yes." (ns. The Times answered the cotton lord as follows: "Mr. Edmund Potter is so impressed with the exceptional and supreme importance of the cotton masters that, in order to preserve this class and perpetuate their profession, he would keep half a million of the labouring class confined in a great moral workhouse against their will. 24. "Iddio af che gli uomini che esercitano inestieri di prima utilita nascono abbondantemente." (Galiani, 1. to 6 p. 2) Non-Textile Factories. Edinburgh, v. * "Rep. Here and there, but in any case only for a time, an industry may be carried on, on a small scale, by means of me- chanical power. Hence, production of a greater quantum of finished commodities in a given time. a tap a av9p<ott0t<; /ptv, Kai rccmdi; ip^oo Suaaejietav ei<5evat." (Sophocles, Antigone.) MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OF COMMODITIES 133 his head from the bowels of the earth, 1 greets gold as its Holy Grail, as the glittering incarnation of the very principle of its own life. The spirit of the Statute of Labourers of 1349 and of its offshoots, comes out 1 "Whenever the legislature attempts to regulate the differences be- tween masters and their workmen, its counsellors are always the masters," says A. of blown-flint glass, now produces in its place 3,000,500 lbs. 2 "The sudden reversion from a system of credit to a system of hard cash heaps theoretical fright on top of the practical panic; and the dealers by whose agency circulation is affected, shudder before the impenetrable mystery in which their own economic relations are involved" (Karl Marx, 1. 7.) This passage refers to the time before the Licinian rogations. 676 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION but published the names both of the labouring families ex- amined and of their landlords. of yarn is nothing more than so much cotton and spindle- waste in disguise. Only of things destined to satisfy the wants and desires of the capitalist class, things which, consequently, enter into the consump- tion-fund of the capitalists? Its extent grows, as with the extent and energy of accumulation, the creation of a surplus-population ad- vances. Giv- en the length of the working-day, the prolongation of the surplus- labour must of necessity originate in the curtailment of the neces- sary labour-time; the latter cannot arise from the former. of yarn, in which the 4s., the re- mainder of the constant capital, is embodied, represents nothing but the value of the auxiliary materials and instruments of labour consumed in producing the 20 lbs, of yarn, 222 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION We have, therefore, arrived at this result: although eight- tenths of the product, or 16 lbs. a-week. p. The value of the linen being given in magnitude, that proportion depends on the value of the coat. Formerly gold was obtained almost exclusively by washing it out from gold-bearing alluvial deposits, products of the weathering of au- riferous rocks. . This is effected by hiring steam power, as is done in some of the Birmingham trades, or by the use of small caloric- engines, as in some branches of weaving. He fed, clothed, and lodged the children, and gave them a small allowance of money. Rep.," p. Anderson. As soon as tools had been converted from being manual im- plements of man into implements of a mechanical apparatus, of a machine, the motive mechanism also acquired an independent form, entirely emancipated from the restraints of human strength. An accessory may be consumed by the instruments of la* bour, as coal under a boiler, oil by a wheel, hay by draft-horses, or it may be mixed with the raw material in order to produce some modification thereof, as chlorine into unbleached linen, coal with iron, dye-stuff with wool, or again, it may help to carry on the work itself, as in the case of the materials used for heating and lighting workshops. or 8s., to 9s., &c. 1741.) "Would you interfere in every case with the employment of women where that employ- ment was degrading?" "It would become injurious, I think, in this way: the best feelings of Englishmen have been gained from the instruction of a mother . . 83, n. The birth of the latter is heralded by a great slaughter of the innocents. Like every other increase in the productiveness of labour, machinery is intended to cheapen commodities, and, by shortening that portion of the working-day, in which the labourer works for himself, to lengthen the other portion that he gives, without an equivalent, to the capitalist. The total product of our community is a social product. Like the soldier he is caught young, ignorant, knowing only his own trade, and his own locality. Capitalist production, therefore, of itself reproduces the sep- aration between labour-power and the means of labour. 646 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION This antagonistic character of capitalistic accumulation 1 is enunciated in various forms by political economists, although by them it is confounded with phenomena, certainly to some extent analogous, but nevertheless essentially distinct, and be- longing to precapitalistic modes of production. "Suppose," says H. SANITARY AND EDUCATIONAL CLAUSES OF THE SAME. The landlords, on their side, not only "indemnified" themselves for the Anti-Jacobin War, which they waged in the name of England, but enriched themselves enormously. The latter is continually with- drawing commodities from circulation and stepping into their places, and in this way continually moving further and further from its starting-point. Their chief diet is bread, fruit, herbs, roots, and dried fish; for they very seldom eat flesh; and when wheat is dear, they eat very little bread." 4 "To which may be added," our essayist goes on, "that their drink is either water or other small liquors, so that they spend very little money. one foot in one minute, and reckons the cost of one horse-power from a steam-engine to be 3d., and from a horse to be 5J/ 2 d. Now since his work forms part of a system, based on the social division of labour, he does not directly produce the actual necessaries which he himself consumes; he produces instead a particular commod- ity, yarn for example, whose value is equal to the value of those necessaries or of the money with which they can be bought. Nassau W. * First Report, &c. The effect of every possible combination may be found by treating each factor in turn as variable, and the other two constant for the time being. . * 1. One is a necessary condition to the existence of the other; they mu- tually call each other into existence. From the instant he steps into the workshop, the use-value of his labour-power, and therefore also its use, which is labour, be- longs to the capitalist. Wake- field, "England and America." Lond., 1833, Vol. . But it cannot acquire the properties of a socially recognised universal equivalent, except by being converted into money. The increase of the difference between constant and variable capi- tal, is, therefore, much less than that of the difference between the mass of the means of production into which the constant, and the mass of the labour-power into which the variable, capital is converted. Such in the middle ages were the virements at Lyons. But the huge masses of iron that had now to be forged, to be welded, to be cut, to be bored, and to be shaped, demanded, on their part, cyclopean machines, for the construction of which the methods of the manufacturing period were utterly inadequate. Redgrave, the factory inspector, in a lecture given at Bradford, in the New Mechanics' Institution, said: "What has struck me for some time past is the altered appearance of the woollen factories. 8.) 4 "A still greater boon is the distinction at last made clear between the worker's own time and his master's. added in the 16th century, a very important element. The elementary factors of the labour-process are 1, the per- sonal activity of man, i.e., work itself, 2, the subject of that work, and 3, its instruments. . This gives 307,058 "supernu- merary" farmers, and reckoning the families the low average of 4 persons, 1,228,232 persons. The latter never rise propor- tionally to the productive power of labour. In the background lurked the intention of screwing up, during prosperous years, the working-day of adult males to 15 hours by the aid of the children. 2 Benjamin Thompson: "Essays, Political, Economical, and Philo- sophical, &c," 3 vols., Loud., 1796-1802, vol. 22, 23). The simple fact, by no means a new one, that machinery cuts off the workmen from their means of subsist- ence is, therefore, in economic parlance tantamount to this, that machinery liberates means of subsistence for the workman, or converts those means into capital for his employment. The first metamorphosis of a commodity is visibly, not only the money's movement, but also that of the commodity itself; in the second metamorphosis, on the contrary, the movement appears to us as the movement of the money alone. The attendance at school must be between 8 a. It therefore follows that the proportional increase or diminution in surplus-value, consequent on a given change in the productiveness of labour, depends on the original magnitude of that portion of the working- 522 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION day which embodies itself in surplus-value; the smaller that portion, the greater is the proportional change; the greater that portion, the less is the proportional change. With their usual practical acute- ness, they had found out that the learned Professor "wanted a good deal of finishing;" it was this discovery that caused them to write for him. THE GENERAL LAW OP CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 639 why and wherefore of an absolute increase of workers accompa- nying an increase of wages, and of a diminution of wages accompa- nying an absolute increase of labourers. The handicraft continues to be the basis. Yet another interesting phenomenon here presents itself. Finally, just as Manufacture arises in part from the combina- tion of various handicrafts, so, too, it develops into a combina- tion of various manufactures. To him its use-value belongs during one working-day. That is why we decide that 8 hours are enough for a working-day, and ought to be legally recognised as enough; why we call to our help that powerful lever, the press; ... This is proved, as well by the complaints of contemporary agriculturists, as by the term "horse-power," which has survived to this day as an expression for mechanical force. During what is called 'the London season,' the operatives belonging to the 'full-priced' bakers at the West End of the town, generally begin work at 11 p. For State intervention has falsified the natural economic relations. 4 1 "The rate of payment for over-time (in lace-making) is so small, from y 2 d. 17.) 2 "Le travail des Compagnons-artisans sera regie a la journge ou a la piece... By the Rev. But the money itself is only one of the two forms of value. 153.) 2 David Urquhart remarks in his "Familiar Words" on the monstros- ity (!) that now-a-days a pound (sterling), which is the unit of the English standard of money, is equal to about a quarter of an ounce of gold. Regularly in autumn and winter women and "young persons," the wives, sons, and daugh- ters of the neighbouring small farmers, a class of people totally unaccustomed to machinery, are taken from field labour to feed the rollers of the scutching mills with flax. THE WORKING-DAY 273 father of Political Economy, and to some extent the founder of Statistics, says in a work that he published in the last third of the 17th century: "Labouring-men (then meaning field-labourers) work 10 hours per diem, and make 20 meals per week, viz., 3 a day for working-days, and 2 on Sundays; whereby it is plain, that if they could fast on Friday nights, and dine in one hour and an half, whereas they take two, from eleven to one; thereby 1 1 thus working ^ more, and spending kk less, the above-men- tioned (tax) might be raised." 1 Was not Dr. Andrew Ure right in crying down the 12 hours' bill of 1833 as a retrogression to the times of the dark ages? 13.) CONSTANT CAPITAL AND VARIABLE CAPITAL 201 as being a concrete, useful process, that the same labour of spin- ning both transfers the values of the means of production to the product, and preserves them in the product. ("A Discourse of the General Notions of Money, Trade, and Exchanges, as They Stand in Relation each to other." By a Merchant! Lond., 1695, p. It is, of course, the fashion amongst the aristocratic shylocks to shrug their shoulders pharisaically at the building speculators, the small landlords, and the open villages. Henry VIII. . When con- 1 Professor Roscher claims to have discovered that one needlewoman employed by Mrs. To effect this transformation, in fact, a certain minimum of money or of exchange-value must be pre-sup- posed in the hands of the individual possessor of money or commodi- ties. to be labourers for hire; they . Others such as clothes and furniture last for longer periods and require to be replaced only at longer intervals. . Polit." Petersbourg, 1815, t. The innumerable equations of which the general form of value is composed, equate in turn the labour embodied in the linen to that embodied in every other commodity, and they thus convert weaving into the general form of manifestation of undiffer- entiated human labour. Only he exploits more wage-labour. 14-15.) Thus defeated by the very workpeople, in whose name it pretended to speak, Capital discovered, with the help of lawyer spectacles, that the Act of 1860, drawn up, like all the Acts of Parlia- ment for the "protection of labour," in equivocal phrases, gave them a pretext to exclude from its working the calenderers and finishers. In slave-labour, even that part of the working-day in which the slave is only replacing the value of his own means of existence, in which, therefore, in fact, he 1 Cf. "Zur Kritik der Politischen Oekonomie," p. COMMODITIES SECTION 1.— THE TWO FACTORS OF A COMMODITY: USE-VALUE AND VALUE (THE SUBSTANCE OF VALUE AND THE MAGNITUDE OF VALUE) The wealth of those societies in which the capitalist mode of production prevails, presents itself as "an immense accumula- tion of commodities," 1 its unit being a single commodity. m. "Sutherland ... In spite of the many advantages offered by this com- bination of manufactures, it never grows into a complete technical 1 In England, the melting-furnace is distinct from the glass-turnace in which the glass is manipulated. The labourer produces, not for himself, but for capital. . These fe- males employed with the men, hardly distinguished from them in their dress, and begrimed with dirt and smoke, are exposed to the deterioration of char- acter, arising from the loss of self-respect, which can hardly fail to follow from their unfeminine occupation." (1. By the 6 hours' spinning, the value of the raw material preserved and transferred to the product is six times as great as before, although the new value added by the labour of the spinner to each pound of the very same raw material is one-sixth what it was formerly. They declare the clauses of the Act of 1860, which require a school cer- tificate to be obtained before employing boys of 10 and 12 years of age, to be quite illusory. If the owner of the iron were to go to the owner of some other commodity offered for exchange, and were to refer him to the price of the iron as proof that it was already money, he would get the same answer as St. Peter gave in heaven to Dante, when the latter recited the creed — "Assai bene e trascorsa D'esta moneta gia la lega e'l peso, Ma dimmi se tu l'hai nella tua borsa." A price therefore implies both that a commodity is exchange- able for money, and also that it must be so exchanged. After the restoration of the Stuarts, the landed proprietors carried, by legal means, an act of usurpation, effected everywhere on the Continent without any legal formality. 79. This operation, conducted on a general scale, appears to imply a contradiction. It is completed in modern indus- try, which makes science a productive force distinct from labour and presses it into the service of capital. 44.) But our capitalist still continues to pay as before only five shillings as the value of a day's labour-power. m., and at the beginning and end of the times nominally fixed for meals, is nearly equivalent to working 13 months in the year." 2 Crises during which production is interrupted and the fac- tories work "short time," i.e., for only a part of the week, natu- rally do not affect the tendency to extend the working-day. 772 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION Undoubtedly, farm-horses in England, being a valuable property, are better fed than English peasants." 1 But, never mind, na- tional wealth is, once again, by its very nature, identical with misery of the people. Thus it appears, that one factor of the labour-process, a means of production, continually enters as a whole into that process, while it enters into the process of the formation of value by fractions only. "The labour- ers ... is deducted. If the quantity of unpaid labour supplied by the working-class, and accumulated by the capitalist class, increases so rapidly that its conversion into capital requires an extraordinary addition of paid labour, then wages rise, and, all other circumstances remaining equal, the un- paid labour diminishes in proportion. If, therefore, the magnitude of value advanced in wages is not merely found again in the product, but is found there augment- ed by a surplus-value, this is not because the seller has been de- frauded, for he has really received the value of his commodity; it is due solely to the fact that this commodity has been used up by the buyer. 137.) Mr. Kinnaird: "Should you say that the col- liers generally improve their education; have you any instances of men who have, since they began to work, greatly improved their education, or do they not rather go back, and lose any ad- vantage that they may have gained?" "They generally become worse: they do not improve; they acquire bad habits; they get on to drinking and gambling and such like, and they go com- pletely to wreck." (n. 421. Addendum to the 3rd ed.) 2 Reynolds' Newspaper, January, 1866. To this end he proves how the development of the social productive power of labour, co-opera- tion, division of labour, use of machinery on a large scale, &c, are impossible without the expropriation of the labourers, and the corresponding transformation of their means of production into capital. pp. On the other hand, the American Civil War brought in its train a colossal national debt, and, with it, pressure of taxes, the rise of the vilest financial aristocracy, the squandering of a huge part of the public land on speculative companies for the exploitation of railways, mines, &c, in brief, the most rapid centralisation of capital. Different communities find different means of production, and different means of subsistence in their natural en- vironment. THE WORKING-DAY 283 It has been seen that these minutiae, which, with military uniformity, regulate by stroke of the clock the times, limits, pauses of the work, were not at all the products of Parliamen- tary fancy. I, p. c, p. A single commodity cannot, therefore, simultaneously assume, in the same expres- sion of value, both forms. In the family. 119.) Hegel held very heretical views on division of labour. The quantity of bread-stuffs consumed 3 1 weekly varied from 7-r- lbs. Not content with that, A and B would declare that the whole series was superfluous and nothing but Hokus Pokus; that for the future A would buy direct from B, and B sell direct to A. The fact, that in the particular form of production with which we are dealing, viz., the production of commodities, the spe- cific social character of private labour carried on independently, consists in the equality of every kind of that labour, by virtue of its being human labour, which character, therefore, assumes in the product the form of value — this fact appears to the produc- ers, notwithstanding the discovery above referred to, to be just as real and final, as the fact, that, after the discovery by science of the component gases of air, the atmosphere itself remained unaltered. 10 by 6 ft. c , p. The value of his labour-power may vary, with the value of his usual means of subsistence, from 3 to 4 shillings, or from 3 to 2 shillings; or, if the value of his labour-power remains constant, its price may, in consequence of changing relations of de- mand and supply, rise to 4s. (1. In turns and transiently it attaches itself first to this and then to that commodity. cotton 3 1 and 2^7- lbs. It is, however , easily seen that since a machine no more creates new value than any other part of constant capital, it cannot add any value under the name of "interest." It is also evident that here, where we are treating of the production of surplus-value, we cannot assume a priori the existence of any part of that value under the name of interest. Already in 1840 a Parliamentary Commission of In- quiry on the labour of children had been appointed. Technology also discovered the few main funda- mental forms of motion, which, despite the diversity of the instru- ments used, are necessarily taken by every productive action of the human body; just as the science of mechanics sees in the most complicated machinery nothing but the continual repetition of the simple mechanical powers. In that character it takes various forms peculiar to itself under which it makes itself at home in the sphere in his private room raised the lid of the desk he sat over, and displayed to a friend rolls of bank-notes, saying with intense glee there were £ 600,000 of them, they were held to make money tight, and would all be let out after three o'clock on the same day." ("The Theory of Exchanges. This must, indeed, ultimately be the case if the conditions supposed above continue. These were the silk manufacturers. Barbon, 1. many hundreds of them ... 1833, p. The proposers of this plan conceive that there will be found in the adjoining counties, persons, who, being un- willing to labour and not possessing substance or credit to take a farm or ship, so as to live without labour, may be induced to make a very advantageous offer to the parish. Relics of by- gone instruments of labour possess the same importance for the investigation of extinct economic forms of society, as do fossil 1 "Reason is just as cunning as she is powerful. Previously, the workman sold his own labour-power, which he disposed of nominally as a free agent. "Ex- change," he says, "cannot take place without equality, and equal- ity not without commensurability" (out' igottj; jjtj obarfc aujAjAsipiac). This transfer takes place during the conversion of those means into a product, or in other words, during the labour-process. to 5 x / 8 d. PIECE-WAGES 557 tions is done by people, who are hired for the day or on piece-work. 1 M — M', money which begets money, such is the description of Capital from the mouths of its first interpreters, the Mercantilists. The boots have therefore more value than the leather, but the value of the leather remains what it was; it has not expanded it- self, has not, during the making of the boots, annexed surplus- value. Since productive power is an attribute of the concrete useful forms of labour, of course it can no longer have any bearing on that la- bour, so soon as we make abstraction from those concrete useful forms. Lond. * 1 "All things being equal, the English manufacturer can turn out a con- siderably larger amount of work in a given time than a foreign manufacturer, so much as to counterbalance the difference of the working-days, between 60 hours a week here, and 72 or 80 elsewhere." ("Rep. How that originated we know perfectly well. "If the State were to require that every child should be sent to school, would there be schools for the children to go to?" "No; but I think if the circumstances were to spring up, the schools would be forthcom- ing." (n. Harrup was followed from the court by a crowd of people who hissed him. 47 sq.) In his evidence before the Com- mittee of the House of Lords on the Bank Acts, a governor of the Bank of England says, with regard to the abrasion of gold coins during currency: "Every year a fresh class of sovereigns becomes too light. "The people who are employed in making up Surat cotton complain very much. Smith's Wealth of Nations." Edinburgh, 1814, vol. From this it follows that, whatever the amount of the real wage, its money rate must rise. This does not re-establish private prop- erty for the producer, but gives him individual property based on the acquisitions of the capitalist era: i.e., on co-operation and the possession in common of the land and of the means of pro- duction, 764 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION The transformation of scattered private property, arising from individual labour, into capitalist private property is, nat- urally, a process, incomparably more protracted, violent, and difficult, than the transformation of capitalistic private prop- erty, already practically resting on socialised production, into socialised property. Econ.," Lond. I. Whilst a large number of acres, that were for- merly tilled, lie idle or are turned permanently into grass-land, a great part of the waste land and peat bogs that were unused for- merly, become of service for the extension of cattle-breeding. The teeming valley of the Nile... Senior uses West's work without mentioning it, he says: "The labourer is principally interested in the amount of wages" (p. It forms the guiding star of the merchant or the manufacturer in every undertaking that requires time. Commodity-owners never equate their own commodities to those of others, and exchange them on a large scale, without differ- ent kinds of commodities belonging to different owners being ex- changeable for, and equated as values to, one and the same special article. 5 "In the Highlands of Scotland," says Buchanan, the commentator on Adam Smith, 1814, "the ancient state of property is daily subverted.... 454-463. c. With the increasing mass of wealth which functions as capital, accumulation increases the concentra- tion of that wealth in the hands of individual capitalists, and thereby widens the basis of production on a large scale and of the specific methods of capitalist production. It consists, like the other, of two antithetical phases. The labourer's productive consumption, and his individual consumption, are therefore totally distinct. * Hence both the capitalist and his ideological representative, the political economist, consider that part alone of the labourer's individual consumption to be productive, which is requisite for the perpetuation of the class, and which therefore must take place in order that the capitalist may have labour-power to con- sume; what the labourer consumes for his own pleasure beyond that part, is unproductive consumption. 3 Since the collective labourer has functions, both simple and complex, both high and low, his members, the individual labour- powers, require different degrees of training, and must therefore have different values. By ruining handicraft production in other coun- tries, machinery forcibly converts them into fields for the supply of its raw material. x Ricardo was the first who accurately formulated the three laws we have above stated. When machinery seizes on an industry by degrees, it produces chronic misery among the operatives who compete with it. Legislation treated them as "voluntary" criminals, and assumed that it depend- ed on their own good will to go on working under the old condi- tions that no longer existed. CO c^ CO O CO . Ure prefers therefore, to describe the central machine, from which the motion comes, not only as an automaton, but as Value Export- ed, 1848. Comm., Fourth Report," Lond., 1865, p. Yet, for all that, the conquered were the really cheated. "Unfortunate females who, in consequence of the cotton famine, were at its commencement thrown out of employ- ment, and have thereby become outcasts of society; and now, though trade has revived, and work is plentiful, continue members of that unfortunate class, and are likely to continue so. On the same day The Times reports another case. Money, like every other commodity, cannot express the magnitude of its value except relatively in other commodities. At the same time the prices, wooing glances cast at money by commodities, define the limits of its convertibility, by pointing to its quantity. . "The diet of the English prisons [is] superior to that of ordinary labourers in England." No. 50. Similar statutes: 18 Elizabeth, c. He therefore confounds together the laws of the rate of surplus-value and the laws of the rate of profit. But in spite of this equality, an immense difference will obtain between the value of the week's product of the Englishman, who works with a mighty automaton, and that of the Chinaman, who has but a spinning-wheel. From being the mere means of effecting the circulation of commodities, this change of form becomes the end and aim. Arber, Lond., 1869, p. So it is with the instruments of labour. The first edition appeared in 1755.) Cantillon, from whom Quesnay, Sir James Steuart & A Smith have largely drawn, already here represents piece-wage as simply a modified form of time-wage. Next it is to be noted that the laws set forth, in the 17th chapter, on the changes in the relative magnitudes of price of la- bour-power and surplus-value, pass by a simple transformation of form, into laws of wages. From 1850-61 Geneva produced 720,000 watches. Just as during the six hours' process our 10 lbs. If it falls short, then, although the commodity itself is not harmed, its owner decidedly is. Let us remember what these people suffer. 1 While productive labour is changing the means of produc- tion into constituent elements of a new product, their value un- dergoes a metempsychosis. That which seems to throb there is my own heart-beating. They have introduced improved and new machinery of various kinds, which altogether supersedes the employment of children {i.e., under 13 years); f. 1 The annual process of reproduction is easily understood, so long as we keep in view merely the sum total of the year's produc- tion. It refused to throw chil- dren of 13 under the Juggernaut Car of capital for more than 8 hours a day, and the Act of 1833 came into full operation. What you gain in la- bour I lose in substance. The employment of these different sorts of labour-power, an employment which is, in its turn, made necessary by the mode of production, makes a great difference in the cost of maintaining the family of the labourer, and in the value of the labour-power of the adult male. Therefore, if a state run most to noblemen and gentlemen, and that the husbandmen and ploughmen be but as their workfolk and labourers, or else mere cottagers (which are but hous'd beggars), you may have a good cavalry, but never good stable bands of foot.... "Is it (the Act) required more against the masters or against the parents?" "It is required against both I think." "You cannot say whether it is required' against one more than against the other?" "No; I can hardly answer that question." (ns. In its function of means of pay- ment, money realises subsequently the value or price of the arti- cle supplied— i.e., in this particular case, the value or price of the labour supplied. 159. GENESIS OP THE INDUSTRIAL CAPITALIST 753 the alchemists, made gold out of nothing. 2 William Wood, 9 years old, was 7 years and 10 months when he began to work. 26. By degrees there arises a discrepancy between the current money-names of the various weights of the precious metal figuring as money, and the actual weights which those names originally represented. of yarn annually, having a value of £12,000. Suppose, for example, that in the old mode of production, a capital of £500 is employed weekly, two-fifths being constant and three-fifths variable capital, i.e., £200 being laid out in means of production, and £300, say £1 per man, in labour-power. And this is to be seen in France, and Italy, and some other parts abroad, where in effect all is noblesse or peasantry.... So soon as it monopolises this position in the expres- sion of value for the world of commodities, it becomes the money commodity, and then, and not till then, does form D become dis- tinct from form C, and the general form of value become changed into the money-form. In the slave-states bordering on the Gulf of Mexico, down to the date of the civil war, ploughs constructed on old Chinese models, which turned up the soil like a hog or a mole, instead of making furrows, were alone to be found. . £ o CO* CM CM CO* os o* CM TH vf C^ O CO SB ^H CO SS <~i£> COCO os CM t^ «rH o oooo 8 O S 8 CM O CM V? In Marylebone, blacksmiths die at the rate of 31 per thousand per annum, or 11 above the mean of the male adults of the country in its entirety. 1 Opening address to the Sanitary Conference, Birmingham, January 15th, 1875, by J. 2 In the London Standard of October 26, 1861, there is a report of pro- ceedings of the firm of John Bright & Co., before the Rochdale magistrates "to prosecute for intimidation the agents of the Carpet Weavers Trades' Union. In times long gone by there were two sorts of people; one, the diligent, intelligent, and, above all, frugal elite; the other, lazy rascals, spending their substance, and more, in riotous living. Answer: Undoubtedly; it would have superseded them much more than it has done, if the hand loom weavers were not enabled to submit to a reduction of wages.' 'Question: But in submitting he has accepted wages which are insufficient to support him, and looks to parochial contribution as the remainder of his support? A capital of 300s. ^ : . 1865." o. That mighty substitute for labour and labourers was forthwith changed into a means for increasing the number of wage-labourers by enrolling, under the direct sway of capital, every member of the workman's family, without distinc- tion of age or sex. The loans enable the government to meet extraordinary expenses, without the tax-payers feeling it immediately, but they necessitate, as a consequence, increased taxes. The flax looks exactly as before. A violent interrup- tion of the labour-process by a crisis, makes him sensitively aware of it. Use-values are only produced by capitalists, because, and in so far as, they are the material substratum, the depositories of exchange-value. . Importun a tout autre, a soi-meme incommode, II change a tout moment d 'esprit comme de mode." ("The Theory of Exchanges, &c," London, 1864, p. Finally, although the depopu- lation has not such destructive consequences as would result in a country with fully developed capitalistic production, it does not go on without constant reaction upon the home-market. In this direction, the shortening of the work- ing-day finds at last a limit in the generalisation of labour. Comm., Second Rep., 1864," p. A machine that is undergoing repair, no longer plays the part of an instrument, but that of a subject of labour. Let us see what Ricardo, e.g., says: "It must be understood that all the pro- ductions of a country are consumed; but it makes the greatest difference imaginable whether they are consumed by those who reproduce, or by those who do not reproduce another value. On the contrary, it is the mode in which they gained a livelihood that explains why here politics, and there Catholicism, played the chief part. The active lifetime of a machine is, however, clearly dependent on the length of the working-day, or on the duration of the daily labour-process multiplied by the number of days for which the process is carried on. GROWING DIFFERENCE IN AMOUNT BETWEEN CAPITAL EMPLOYED AND CAPITAL CONSUMED. over-production." (Th. Corbet, I. This was done, so to say, to celebrate the inauguration of the new Free-trade era. But Professor Rogers comes to the conclusion that the lot of the English agricultural labourer of to-day, not to speak of his predecessor in the last half of the 14th and in the 15th centu- ry, but only compared with his predecessor from 1770 to 1780, has changed for the worse to an extraordinary extent, that "the peasant has again become a serf," and a serf worse fed and worse clothed. i., I will mention one process as an illustration of this diminution in the number of children, wherein by the addition of an apparatus, called a piecing machine, to existing machines, the work of six or four half-timers, according to the peculiarity of each machine, can be performed by one young person (over 13 years) ...the half-time system 'stimulated' the invention of the piecing machine." (Reports of Insp. 3 It is a Parliamentary abor- tion. . It is highly characteristic of the present status of so-called economic science, that neither Senior himself, who, at a later period, to his honour be it said, energetically supported the factory legislation, nor his opponents, from first to last, have ever been able to explain the false conclusions of the "original discovery." They appeal to actual experience, but the why and wherefore remains a mystery. Yarn with which we neither weave nor knit, is cotton wasted. In order that variable capital may perform its function, constant capital must be advanced in proper proportion, a proportion given by the special technical conditions of each labour-process. 234, sqq.) "Our men complained very much of the bad ventilation of the collie- ries . But we cannot, except by a miracle, con- vert into capital anything but such articles as can be employed in the labour-process (i.e., means of production), and such further CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO CAPITAL 581 articles as are suitable for the sustenance of the labourer (i.e., means x>i subsistence). In 1819, the number of picks in power-loom-weaving per minute was 60— in 1842 it was 140, showing a vast increase of labour." 1 In the face of this remarkable intensity of labour which had already been reached in 1844 under the Twelve Hours' Act, there appeared to be a justification for the assertion made at that time by the English manufacturers, that any further progress in that direction was impossible, and therefore that every further reduction of the hours of labour meant a lessened production. In England the first form of the farmer is the bailiff, himself a serf. Trading nations, properly so called, exist in the ancient world only in its interstices, like the gods of Epicurus in the Intermundia, or like Jews in the pores of Polish society. Widerlegung der Ricardo'schen Lehre von der Grundrente und Begriindung einer neuen Rententheorie." Berlin, 1851. The total of all the different circuits constitutes the circulation of commodities. 2 Moreover, the co-op- eration of wage-labourers is entirely brought about by the capital that employs them. II., p. The one, as well as the other, is laid out by the capitalist in the purchase of commodities that place him in a position to begin afresh the fabrication of his goods, and this time, on an extended scale. they took a course to take away depopulating inclosures, and depopulating pasturage." An Act of Henry VII., 1489, cap. All their villages were destroyed and burnt, 1 1. A thing can be useful, and the product of human labour, without being a commodity. 1 H. By druggists it is considered the leading article. We will suppose it to consist of four-fifths constant and one-fifth variable, which means that only £100 is now laid out in labour-power. 3 "La valeur consiste dans le rapport d'echange qui se trouve entre telle chose et telle autre, entre telle mesure d'une production, et telle mesure d'une autre." (Le Trosne: "De l'lnteret Social." Physiocrates. "When the inhabitants have convinced themselves, by boring a hole in the tree, that the pith is ripe, the trunk is cut down and divided into several pieces, the pith is extracted, mixed with water and filtered: it is then quite fit for use as sago. On the other hand, we treat the capitalist producer as owner of the entire surplus-value, or, better perhaps, as the representative of all the sharers with him in the booty. without any variation in the price of la- bour. These children work longer than the labourers in the neighbouring villages.... But salaries may be regulated, and may also be reduced if they take too much from wages. 116 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION the same movement that as regards the commodity consists of two processes of an antithetical character, is, when considered as the movement of the money, always one and the same process, a continued change of places with ever fresh commodities. On the other hand, the labourer turns the money paid to him for his labour-power, into means of subsistence: this is his individu- al consumption. The commodities are equated beforehand in im- agination, by their prices, to definite quantities of money. This is the land of Cockaigne, into which the great Malthusian panacea, depopulation, has transformed green Erin. Since- its daily wear and tear, its coal-consumption, &c, are spread over the stupendous masses of iron hammered by it in a day, only a small value is added to a hundred weight of iron; but that value would be very great, if the cyclopean instrument were employed in driving in nails. The separation of labour from its product, of subjective labour-power from the objective conditions of labour, was therefore the real foundation in fact, and the starting-point of capitalist production. to 8s.; in Dorsetshire from 7s. All villagers were forbidden to let rooms to single men and women; all the latter were to be reported to the authorities and cast into prison if they w T ere unwilling to become servants, even if they were employed at any other work, such as sowing seeds for the peasants at a daily wage, or even buying and selling corn. Fonteret, Paris, 1858," and "Die Krankheiten, welche verschiednen Standen, Altern und Geschlechtern eigen- thumlich sind. monetary functions which are usually performed by gold and silver coins, may be performed as effectually by a circulation of inconvertible notes, having no value but that factitious and conventional value they derive from the law, is a fact which admits, I conceive, of no denial. 2 1. walked two miles to their work." 2 This same Strand, a main thoroughfare which gives strangers an imposing idea of the wealth of London, may serve as an example of the packing together of human beings in that town. The coal burnt under the boiler vanishes without leaving a trace; so, too, the tallow with which the axles of wheels are greased. of cotton for £100, and resell the 2,000 lbs. A commodity may be the product of the most skilled labour, but its value, by equating it to the product of simple unskilled labour, represents a definite quantity of the latter labour alone. Barbon, 1. Naylor & Vickers, on the other hand, in conformity with the interest of their busi- ness, considered that periodically changed night-labour might possibly do more harm than continual night-labour.) We find the men who do it, as well as the others who do other work only by day Our objections to not allowing boys under [ 18 to work at night, would be on account of the increase of ex- pense, but this is the only reason. Besides, there were still in Bradford, in 1861, 1,751 uninhabited houses. (1863) and VI. of gold. By its adoption as money it received an additional value (une valeur addi- tionnelle)". Compare, for instance, the higher with the lower branches of mathematics. Hence, in spite of the confusing variety of the commodities them- selves, their values become magnitudes of the same denomination, gold-magnitudes. Even the Reign of Terror left it un- touched. At first then, C=c-fv: for example, if £500 is the capital advanced, its components may be such that the £500 =£410 const. Nay, more, his working-day may be prolonged at the same time, so as to make him produce, say 1,400 articles in 14 hours. 2 "An Essay on Trade and Commerce," Lond., 1770, p. 84, n. If labour could be had without purchase, wages might be dispensed with." 1 But if the labourers could live on air they could not be bought at any price. 1 As has been already said, the simple translation of the value, or respec- tively of the price, of labour-power into the exoteric form of wages transforms all these laws into laws of the fluctuations of wages. But we have nothing to sell whereby we might advance ye price there of, to countervaile those things that we must buy agayne." In another place the knight asks the doctor: "I pray you, what be those sorts that ye meane. Hence the accumulation of the national debt has no more infallible measure than the successive rise in the stock of these banks, whose full development dates from the found- ing of the Bank of England in 1694. "Its plaster walls bulged very like a lady's dress in a curtsey. . These acts curb the passion of cap- ital for a limitless draining of labour-power, by forcibly limit* ing the working-day by state regulations, made by a state that is ruled by capitalist and landlord. . THE GENERAL LAW OP CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 709 in towns, remain agricultural labourers, and are constantly sent back to the country districts in search of work. But what are we to think of John Stuart Mill, who, half a century after Ricardo, solemnly claims superiority over the mercantilists, by clumsily repeating the wretched evasions of Ricardo's earliest vulgarisers? If the population increases, a new commu- nity is founded, on the pattern of the old one, on unoccupied land. of Fact., 31st Oct., 1865," p. Seven thousand ... Thus gold always renders the same service as an invariable standard of price, however much its value may vary. . In this \ industry are to be found employed children of 2 and 2— years." 2 Where lace-making ends in the counties of Buckingham and Bedford, straw-plaiting begins, and extends over a large part of Hertfordshire and the westerly and northerly parts of Essex. Repeal of the Corn Laws; 1847 crisis, general reduction of wages by 10 and more per cent, in honour of the "big loaf"; 1848 continued depression; Manchester under military protection; 1849 revival; 1850 prosper- ity; 1851 falling prices, low wages, frequent strikes; 1852 improve- ment begins, strikes continue, the manufacturers threaten to import foreign hands; 1853 increasing exports. He cannot take the one without giving the other. In this way there is created, on the one hand, a constantly extending market for gold and silver, uncon- nected with their functions as money, and, on the other hand, a latent source of supply, to which recourse is had principally in times of crisis and social disturbance. In former times, capital resorted to legislation, whenever necessary, to enforce its proprietary rights over the free labourer. P.; while 1,372 employed upwards of 20 H. Given the value of these means of subsistence, the value of his labour-power is given; 1 and given the value of his labour-power, the duration of his necessary labour- time is given. A. John Brown & Co., steel and iron works, employing about 3,000 men and boys, part prevails, by which all employed on the paper-making machinery work 15 or 16 hours every day in the week. On the other hand, if s=0, or in other words, if the labour-power, whose value is advanced in the form of variable capital, were to produce only its equivalent, we should have C=c+v or C the value of the product =(c+v)+0 or G— C. Written by Thomas Mun of London, merchant, and now published for the common good by his son John Mun." London, 1669, pp. Apart from errors in principle, Senior's statement is confused. 1 "Report, &c, Relative to the Grievances Complained of by the Jour- neymen Bakers." Lond. 2 His wants are constantly making themselves felt, and necessitate the continual purchase of other people's commodities, while the production and sale of his own goods require time, and depend upon circumstances. Accord- ing to them the rate of wages in the country, still very low,* has within the last 20 years risen 50-60 per cent., and stands now, on the average, at 6s. Owen: "Observations on the Effects of the Manufacturing System," 2nd Ed., Lond., 1817.) 2 The English, who have a tendency to look upon the earliest form of appearance of a thing as the cause of its existence, are in the habit of at- tributing the long hours of work in factories to the extensive kidnapping of children, practised by capitalists in the infancy of the factory system, on workhouses and orphanages, by means of which robbery, unresisting mater- ial for exploitation was procured. etant toujours attire par les productions." (Le Trosne, 1. Tucker was a parson and a Tory, but, for the rest, an honourable man and a competent political economist. But that is not my fault, it is the fault of the knife. . 2 "I would desire, indeed, no more convincing evidence of the compe- tency of the machinery of the hoards in specie-paying countries to perform every necessary office of international adjustment, without any sensible aid from the general circulation, than the facility with which France, when but just recovering from the shock of a destructive foreign invasion, complet- ed within the space of 27 months the payment of her forced contribution of nearly 20 millions to the allied powers, and a considerable proportion of the sum in specie, without any perceptible contraction or derangement of her domestic currency, or even any alarming fluctuation of her exchanges." (Fullarton, 1. They form two distinct acts, of polar and opposite characters, when performed by one single person. Neither have the sub-inspectors or myself any means of satisfying ourselves, when we inspect a mill working by shifts, that the young persons and women are not working more than 10 hours a-day. (1. ... These quantities vary continually, independ- ently of the will, foresight and action of the producers. without any comment this will go far to explain many of the complaints of stinting the action, superior skill, and working-power, made by the employers against the men" (in Trades-Unions. Lorsqu'il en est besoin, il ne fait que glisser d'une main dans l'autre sans s'arreter un instant." (Le Trosne, 1. He says: "Prudential habits with regard to marriage, carried to a considerable extent among the labouring class of a country mainly depending upon manufactures and commerce, might injure it. c, pp. de Forbonnais: "Elements du Commerce, Nouv. Dr. Lee, Medical Officer of Health for Manchester, stated "that the average age at death of the Manchester . In 1836 a manufacturer stated: "The labour now undergone in the factories is much greater than it used to be . 132.) CAPITALIST PRODUCTION must always be outraged, and morality almost of necessity must suffer. (See "Rep. Consequently by the mere labour of spinning, a value of three shillings is added to the cotton. This circumstance formed a great hindrance to the establishment of steel-pen factories. The fact that the work- man, when the productiveness of his labour has been increased, off the Bounty on Corn Exported," &c, Lond., 1753, p. In the same way the means of communication and transport handed down from the manufacturing period soon became unbearable trammels on Modern Industry, with its feverish haste of production, its enormous extent, its constant flinging of capital and labour from one sphere of production into another, and its newly-created connexions with the markets of the whole world. 318.) "Their (the capitalists') interest is that the productive powers of the labourers they employ should be the greatest possible. In the production of the coat, human labour-power, in the shape of tailoring, must have been actually expended. The quantity of it consumed in a giv- en time, by a given amount of labour, increases in the same ratio as does the productive power of that labour in consequence of its division. But hitherto no one ha3 discovered the art of catching fish in waters that contain none. . Only consider! where would agriculture and trade be without the knife? On the other hand, they are used in common, and therefore on a larger scale than be- fore. 13. But by the alienation of all my labour-time and the whole of my work, I should be converting the substance itself, in other words, my general activity and reality, my person, into the property of another." (Hegel, "Philosophie des Rechts." Berlin, 1840, p. c, pp. The examination of the witnesses on this subject is truly droll. He has a fellow- feeling for his own Adam, and his education gradually enables him to smile at the rage for asceticism, as a mere prejudice of the old-fashioned miser. If a giant thinker like Aristotle erred in his appreciation of slave labour, why should a dwarf economist like Bastiat he right in his appreciation of wage-labour? 4 tendencies, it would be very wrong to class Ihem with the herd ol vulgar economic apologists. .... ... "He [the agricultural labourer] might say: 'I work hard, and have not enough to eat, and when in prison I did not work hard- er where I had plenty to eat, and therefore it is better for me to be in prison again than here.'" 4 From the tables appended to the first volume of the Report I have compiled the annexed com- parative summary. 441) runs as follows in the original physiocratic work: "Les productions ne se paient qu'avec des productions." (Le Trosne, I. 11 by 6 ft. Paris, 1836, p. This sort of work is given out 1 "Gh. Empl. So far, therefore, they do not confront each other as commodities, but only as products or use-values. 3 SECTION 2.— ERRONEOUS CONCEPTION, BY POLITICAL ECONOMY, OF REPRODUCTION ON A PROGRESSIVELY INCREASING SCALE Before we further investigate accumulation or the reconver- sion of surplus-value into capital, we must brush on one side an ambiguity introduced by the classical economists. "It is a common practice with the coal masters to pay once a month, and advance cash to their workmen at the end of each intermediate week. He speaks first of "the one labour," then of "the other labour," and finally of "labour " without further qualification, as the substance of the value of everything. The latter also were practically at the same time peasant farmers, since, besides their wages, they had allotted to them arable land to the extent of 4 or more acres, together with their cottages. Smith also confounds differ- entiation of the instruments of labour, in which the detail labourers them- selves took an active part, with the invention of machinery; in this latter, it is not the workmen in manufactories, but learned men, handicraftsmen, and even peasants (Brindley), who play a part. Let us now transport ourselves from Robinson's island bathed in light to the European middle ages shrouded in darkness. With a given degree of exploitation of labour-power, the mass of the surplus-value produced is determined by the number of workers simultaneously exploited; and this corresponds, although in varying proportions, with the magnitude of the capi- tal. If this rate, e.g., were 100 per cent., the working-day might be of 8, 10, 12, or more hours. If a capital of £1,000 beget yearly a surplus-value of £200, and if this surplus-value be consumed every year, it is clear that at the end of 5 years the surplus-value consumed will amount to 5 X £200 or the £1,000 originally advanced. It converts the labourer into a crippled monstrosity, by forc- ing his detail dexterity at the expense of a world of productive capabilities and instincts; just as in the States of La Plata they butcher a whole beast for the sake of his hide or his tallow. Hence the relation between the values of two commodities supplies us with the simplest expression of the value of a single commodity. — Ed. MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OF COMMODITIES H7 If, on the contrary, only one phase of the metamorphosis is gone through, if there are only sales or only purchases, then a given piece of money changes its place only once. 1 For this reason, we can speak of the coat-value of the linen when its value is expressed in coats, or of its corn-value when expressed in corn, and so on. Among instruments that are the result of previous labour and also belong to this class, we find workshops, canals, roads, and so forth. of Fact., 31st Oct., 1866," p. They were transformed into an element of constant capital. Kirchmann von Rodbertus. The possessor of money does find on the market such a special com- modity in capacity for labour or labour-power. As soon as his la- bour actually begins, it has already ceased to belong to him; it can therefore no longer be sold by him. It has its immediate origin in the metallic currency. His aim is augmentation of his capi- tal, production of commodities containing more labour than he pays for, containing therefore a portion of value that costs him nothing, and that is nevertheless realised when the commodities are sold. not in propor- tion to the accumulation of the general capital.... Thus integument is burst asunder. Co-operation, such as we find it at the dawn of human devel- opment, among races who live by the chase, 2 or, say, in the agri- culture of Indian communities, is based, on the one hand, on own- ership in common of the means of production, and on the other hand, on the fact, that in those cases, each individual has no more torn himself off from the navel-string of his tribe or community, than each bee has freed itself from connexion with the hive. "The great advantage of the machinery employed in brick-making consists in this, that the employer is made entirely independent of skilled labourers." ("Ch. Empl. COMMODITIES 41 to produce the latter, he must not only produce use-values, but use-values for others, social use-values. . in Scotland, where education is better, this prejudice is, probably, unknown." (Charles H. 8 1. c, t. The effect on the health of the workpeople is self-evident. . THE RELAY SYSTEM Constant capital, the means of production, considered from the standpoint of the creation of surplus-value, only exist to absorb labour, and with every drop of labour a proportional quantity of surplus-labour. Each of these units is the same as any other, so far as it has the character of the average labour-power of society, and takes effect as such; that is, so far as it requires for producing a commodity, no more time than is needed on an average, no more than is socially necessary. A part of the surplus-value turned into additional capital must always be re-transformed into variable capital, or additional labour-fund. The money-owner buys everything necessary for this purpose, such as raw material, in the market, and pays for it at its full value. Thus the Factory Inspector's report on the period of the cri- sis from 1857 to 1858: "It may seem inconsistent that there should be any over- working at a time when trade is so bad; but that very badness leads to the transgression by unscrupulous men, they get the ex- tra profit of it In the last half year, says Leonard Hor- ner, 122 mills in my district have been given up; 143 were found standing," yet, over-work is continued beyond the legal hours. It is true, no doubt, as we have already seen, that every instrument of labour enters as a whole into the labour-proc- ess, and only piece-meal, proportionally to its average daily loss by wear and tear, into the value-begetting process. This power is due to co-operation it- self. They become rough, foul- mouthed boys, before Nature has taught them that they are women. since what they gain as sellers, they precisely expend io the quality of buyers." ("The Essential Principles of the Wealth of Nations, &c, London, 1797, p. 2 It did not, however, prevent them, during 10 years, from spinning silk 10 hours a day out of the blood of lit- tle children who had to be placed upon stools for the performance of their work. There is no consumption of their value, 2 and it would therefore be inaccurate to say that it is reproduced. l'ouvrier ne transmet rien de materiel." (Storch: "Gours d'Econ. c, p. The mode of this distribution will vary with the productive organisation of the community, and the degree of historical development attained by the producers. 2. En 6te, il travaille comme un forcat au labourage et a la r£colte; il se couche a 9 heures et se leve a deux, pour suffire aux travaux; en hiver il devrait Sparer ses forces par un plus grand repos; mais il manqu- era de grains pour le pain et les semailles, s'il se dSfait des denrees qu'il faudrait vendre pour payer les impots. The thinning-out of the independent, self-supporting peasants not only brought about the crowding together of the industrial proletariat, in the way that Geoffroy Saint Hilaire explained the condensation of cosmical matter at one place, by its rarefaction at another. 11. In a wider sense we may include among the instruments of labour, in addition to those things that are used for directly transferring labour to its subject, and which therefore, in one way or another, serve as conductors of activity, all such objects as are necessary for carrying on the labour-process. These figure in the census as Londoners, they swell out the number of heads on which the Lon- don death-rate is calculated, without adding proportionally to the number of deaths in that place. Redgrave, Inspector of Factories, asserts that this time the system under which orphans and pauper children were treated "legally" as apprentices "was not accompanied with the old abuses" (on these "abuses" see Engels. no man would have a motive for accumulating more capital than he could use with his own hands. For him, in fact, his 12 hours' labour is the means of buying the 3s. 3 The Act passed in 1860, determined that, in regard to dye and bleach- works, the working-day should be fixed on August 1st, 1861, provision- ally at 12 hours, and definitely on August 1st, 1862, at 10 hours, i.e., at 10-^- hours for ordinary days, and 7-s- for Saturday. In Manufacture the isolation of each de- tail process is a condition imposed by the nature of division of labour, but in the fully developed factory the continuity of thoso processes is, on the contrary, imperative. MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 455 especially to India, surpass all former years; 1830 glutted markets, great distress; 1831 to 1833 continued depression, the monopoly of the trade with India and China withdrawn from the East India Company; 1834 great increase of factories and machinery, short- ness of hands. That the relative sur- plus-population is to-day as great as before 1846; that wages are just as low, that the oppression of the labourers has increased, that misery is forcing the country towards a new crisis. That process, however, takes good care to prevent these self-conscious instruments from leav- ing it in the lurch, for it removes their product, as fast as it is made, from their pole to the opposite pole of capital. If both be given, we have only to perform the conclud- ing operation, viz., to calculate — , the ratio of the surplus-value to the variable capital. All that these things now tell us is, that human labour-power has been expended in their production, that human labour is embodied in them. m." 1 Already, in December, 1848, Leonard Horner had a list of 65 manufacturers and 29 over- lookers who unanimously declared that no system of supervi- sion could, under this relay system, prevent enormous over-work. Being independent of each other, the labourers are isolated persons, who enter into relations with the capitalist, but not with one another. * 1. 649.) "There is a peculiarity of dress?" "Yes ... E. Hence the invention now-a-days of machines in Eng- land that are employed only in North America; just as in the six- teenth and seventeenth centuries, machines were invented in Ger- many to be used only in Holland, and just as many a French invention of the eighteenth century was exploited in England alone. l Apart from these contradictions, a direct exchange of money, i.e., of realised labour, with living labour would either do away with the law of value which only begins to develop itself freely on the basis of capitalist production, or do away with capitalist production itself, which rests directly on wage-labour. Mr. Turner was, in 1827, rector of Wilmslow, in Chesh- ire, a manufacturing district. Engels, 1. 19) DIVISION OF LABOUR AND MANUFACTURE 351 and the social division of labour, which forms the foundation of all production of commodities. 56. surpl. The great republic has, therefore, ceased to be the prom- ised land for emigrant labourers. Cer- tain beautiful fragments of the old statute vanished only in 1859. In addition to a measure of its extension, i.e., duration, labour now acquires a measure of its intensity or of the degree of its con- densation or density. G. And this quantity of labour-time o does in fact exist in the 20 lbs. This refers to the cotton trade as a whole, and, of course, requires considerable modification for individual districts. It could not be increased at will, it failed at certain seasons of the year, and, above all, it was essentially local.* Not till the invention of Watt's second and so-called double-acting steam-engine, was a prime mover found, that begot its own force by the consump- tion of coal and water, whose power was entirely under man's control, that was mobile and a means of locomotion, that was urban and not, like the water-wheel, rural, that permitted pro- duction to be concentrated in towns instead of, like the water- wheels, being scattered up and down the country, 3 that was of universal technical application, and, relatively speaking, 1 Faulhaber, 1625; De Caus, 1688. ... and this for six months. Dr. Embleton, of the Newcastle Fever Hospital, says: "There can be little doubt that the great cause of the continuance and spread of the typhus has been the over-crowding of human beings, and the uncleanliness of their dwellings. i., p. xi.. II., pp. . One sort of commodity may be born on its own market place, another has to make a long journey to market. To become a free seller of labour-power, who carries his commodity wherever he finds a market, he must further have escaped from the regime of the guilds, their rules for apprentices and jo*urney- men, and the impediments of their labour regulations. weekly with 4 adults and 4 children, had nothing good about it, except the walls, from the floor of rough-hewn pieces of stones to the roof of worn-out thatch. In a second school I found the schoolroom 15 feet long, and 10 feet wide, and counted in this space 75 children, who were gabbling something unintelli- gible." 1 "But it is not only in the miserable places above referred to that the children obtain certificates of school attendance with- out having received instruction of any value, for in many schools where there is a competent teacher, his efforts are of little avail from the distracting crowd of children of all ages, from infants of 3 years old and upwards; his livelihood, miserable at the best, de- pending on the pence received from the greatest number of chil- dren whom it is possible to cram into the space. If the capitalist wishes to raise this sum by one half, he can employ 50 more workers; but then he must also advance more capital, not merely for wages, but for instruments of labour. All that forest land is as totally unproduc- tive.... The former plays an active, the latter a passive, part. MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 457 spinners and of weavers were 3s. Al- though a great deal of cleaning is constantly goingon day by day, yetSaturday is generally the day set apart for the thorough cleaning of the machinery, and a great deal of this is done while the machinery is in motion." Since cleaning is not paid for, the workpeople seek to get done with it as speedily as possible. The New York and Philadelphia manufacturers had previously been in the habit of "making" umbrellas with all their belongings. A memo- THE WORKING-DAY 265 restrainable passion, its were-wolf hunger for surplus-labour, capital oversteps not only the moral, but even the merely physical maximum bounds of the working-day. If they were kept up there would be a waste of fuel (instead of, as now, a waste of the living substance of the workers), and if they were not, there would be loss of time in laying the fires and getting the heat up (whilst the loss of sleeping time, even to chil- dren of 8 is a gain of working-time for the Sanderson tribe), and the furnaces themselves would suffer from the changes of tem- perature." (Whilst those same furnaces suffer nothing from the day and night change of labour.) 1 1 1. Bailey: "Money and its Vicissitudes," pp. 144.) "The Scotch grandees dispossessed families as they would grub up coppice-wood, and they treated villages and their people as Indians harassed with wild beasts do, in their vengeance, a jungle with tigers.... "Question 9 — Some of the more wealthy farmers in the parish have devised a skilful mode by which all the trouble of executing this Act (the 43rd of Elizabeth) might be avoided. The fact that the owner of the commodities, under the designation of producer, sells them over their value, and under the designation of consumer, pays too much for them, does not carry us a single step further. B. 26. Of course it is impossible to spin without material and spindles; and therefore the existence of these things as products, at the commencement of the spinning operation, must be presumed: but in the process itself, the fact that they are products of previous labour, is a matter of utter indifference; just as in the digestive process, it is of no impor- tance whatever, that bread is the produce of the previous la- bour of the farmer, the miller, and the baker. For instance, 10 lbs. Not only are greater quanti- ties of foreign articles of luxury exchanged for home products, but a greater mass of foreign raw materials, ingredients, and inter- mediate products, are used as means of production in the home industries. But in the flood of production all the capital originally advanced becomes a van- ishing quantity (magnitude* evanescens, in the mathematical sense), compared with the directly accumulated capital, i.e., with the surplus-value or surplus-product that is reconverted into capital, whether it functions in the hands of its accumulator, or in thoso of others Hence, Political Economy describes capital in gen- eral as 'accumulated wealth" (converted surplus-value or reve* 1 We may well, therefore, feel astonished at the cleverness of Prou- dhon, who would abolish capitalistic property by enforcing the eternal laws of property that are based on commodity production! 588 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION nue), "that is employed over again in the production of sur- plus-value," 1 and the capitalist as "the owner of surplus-value." 2 It is merely another way of expressing the same thing to say that all existing capital is accumulated or capitalised interest, for interest is a mere fragment of surplus-value. It would thus appear that even Greeks and Romans had some process of production, consequently, 82 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION To what extent some economists are misled by the Fetishism inherent in commodities, or by the objective appearance of the social characteristics of labour, is shown, amongst other ways, by the dull and tedious quarrel over the part played by Nature in the formation of exchange-value. We say labour, i.e., the expenditure of his vital force by the spinner, and not spinning labour, because the special work of spinning counts here, only so far as it is the expenditure of labour-power in general, and not in so far as it is the specific work of the spinner. Juarez abolished peonage. Inspection of mines.— Casualties from explosions are not the only things the workmen suffer from. At the date of the Child. The increase of the latter appears, therefore, in the diminution of the mass of labour in proportion to the mass of means of production moved by it, or in the diminution of the subjective factor of the labour-process as compared with the objective factor. [And since Marx wrote the above, the power-loom has invaded these facto- ries, and is now— 1886— rapidly superseding the hand-loom. It may be resolved into three essentially different stages. Now, we saw, when we were considering the proc- ess of creating value, that, if a use-value be effectively consumed in the production of a new use-value, the quantity of labour ex- pended in the production of the consumed article, forms a portion of the quantity of labour necessary to produce the new use-value; this portion is therefore labour transferred from the means of pro- duction to the new product. — F. In the larger seignorial domains, the old bailiff, himself a serf, was displaced by the free farmer. Hamilton. . The truth being, that when a commodity acts as equivalent, no quantitative determi- nation of its value is expressed. c, p. "I have here in view enclosures of open fields and lands already improved. representing 3 different working-days of 7, 9, and 12 hours. Nevertheless, we must examine this tautology a little more closely. But, just as in the beginning, the only participators in the labour-process were man and the earth, which latter exists independently of man, so even now we still employ in the process many means of production, provided directly by Nature, that do not represent any combina- tion of natural substances with human labour. 40, 41. Dr. Ure himself deplores the gross ignorance of mechanical science existing among his dear machinery-exploiting manu- facturers, and Liebig can a tale unfold about the astounding ignorance of chemistry displayed by English chemical manufacturers. The new poor law furthers the migration of agricul- tural labourers into the factory districts. And the consumption of the commodity belongs not to the seller who parts with it, but to the buyer, who 1 This question is far more important than the celebrated question of Sir Robert Peel to the Birmingham Chamber of Commerce: What is a pound? 1 Richard Jones, who died a few years ago, and was the successor of Mai thus in the chair of Political Economy at Haileybury College, discusses this point well in the light of two important facts. [So also in Sections 18 and 19 of the Statute of Apprentices of Elizabeth, ten days' imprisonment is decreed for him that pays the higher wages, but twenty-one days for him that receives them.] A statute of 1360 increased the penalties and authorised the masters to extort labour at the legal rate of wages by corporal punishment. Then he reckons £150 for coal used to heat the mill occasionally, and run the engine now and then. (2) As wealth increases, the less precious metal is thrust out by the more precious from its place as a measure of value, copper by silver, silver by gold, however much this order of se- quence may be in contradiction with poetical chronology. Its analysis shows that it is, in reality, a very queer thing, abounding in metaphysical subtleties and theological niceties. No doubt, the expression 20 yards of linen=l coat, or 20 yards of linen are worth 1 coat, implies the opposite relation: 1 coat =20 yards of linen, or 1 coat is worth 20 yards of linen. m.; on the average in France more than half are rejected on account of deficient height or bodily weakness. But the process goes beyond this phase. The state of health of this cheap material for exploitation will be seen from the following table, computed by Dr. Trueman, physician to the Nottingham General Dispensary. But every single component of this product must be brought into the market as a commodity, and there the difficulty begins. If the spin- ner, instead of spinning, were working in a coal mine, the sub- ject of his labour, the coal, would be supplied by Nature; never- theless, a definite quantity of extracted coal, a hundredweight for example, would represent a definite quantity of absorbed la- bour. 60-61, says, "The decrease of villenage seems necessarily to have been the era of the origin of the poor. Oct., 1857," pp. The labour-process, turned into the process by which the capitalist consumes labour-power, exhibits two characteristic phenomena. c, p. But, on the other hand, his activity now confined in one groove, assumes the form best adapted to the narrowed sphere of action. The same oper- ations which, in the case of a papermaker belonging to a German Guild, merged one into the other as the successive acts of one arti- ficer, became in the Dutch paper manufacture so many partial oper- ations carried on side by side by numerous co-operating labour- ers. Manufacture is characterised by the differentiation of the instruments of labour— a differentiation whereby implements of a given sort acquire fixed shapes, adapted to each particular ap- plication, and by the specialisation of those instruments, giving to each special implement its full play only in the hands of a spe- cific detail labourer. At one time they try agriculture, at another they take to commerce, at an- other they busy themselves with two or three occupations at once. The continuous superseding of the agricul- tural labourers, in spite of their diminishing number and the in- creasing mass of their products, gives birth to their pauperism. It is as clear as noon-day, that man, by his industry, changes the forms of the materials furnished by Nature, in such a way as to make them useful to him. In paper money it stands out plainly. That which is new is the intelligence and the humanity which remedies them." ("History of England," vol. or further into the night. c. . The ellipse is a form of motion which, while allowing this contradiction to go on, at the same time reconciles it. The Repeal of the Corn Laws, and of the duties on cotton and other raw material; Free-trade proclaimed as the guiding star of legislation; in a word, the arrival of the mil- lennium. 2 No sooner does labour undergo the least development, than it requires specially prepared instruments. Thus, for instance, Fielden, himself a manufacturer, says: "It is evident that the long hours of work were brought about by the circumstance of so great a number oi destitute chil- dren being supplied from different parts of the country, that the masters were independent of the hands, and that having once established the cus- tom by means of the miserable materials they had procured in this way, they could impose it on their neighbours with the greater facility." (J. Everything becomes saleable and buyable. In order to examine the object of our investi- gation in its integrity, free from all disturbing subsidiary circumstances, we must treat the whole world as one nation, and assume that capitalist production is everywhere established and has possessed itself of every branch of industry. or 12s. c, p. 57. J. That is the consequence of the increasing productivity of labour. lid. Bekker. Let the forests be increased in number and extent during the next quarter of a century, as they have been in the last, and the Gaels will perish from their native soil. of yarn, represent nothing but the new value of 6s., created during the 12 hours' spinning process. But whereas formerly an increase of capital by 20 per cent, would have sufficed to raise the demand for labour 20 per cent., now this latter rise requires a tripling of the original capital. The landlord, without regard to the hereditary tenant (a category used in error here), now offers his land to the highest bidder, who, if he is an improver, in- stantly adopts a new system of cultivation. 3 The number of persons taxed were in 1864, 308,416, out of a population of 23,891,009; in 1865, 332,431 out of a popu- lation of 24,127,003. How completely in the meantime circum- stances had changed, is proved by an occurrence unheard-of before in the English Lower House. The effect is the same as if each individual weaver had expended more labour-time upon his particular product than is socially necessary. Meanwhile, the number of houses was one less. Hume took his theory of interest from it. Several attempts to procure them em- ployment elsewhere, were rendered of no avail by their ignorance and brutality, and by their mental and bodily degradation. c, p. 3 Price, 1. 2 Countries in which the bourgeois form of production is de- veloped to a certain extent, limit the hoards concentrated in the strong rooms of the banks to the minimum required for the proper performance of their peculiar functions. All the characteristics of Robin- son's labour are here repeated, but with this difference, that they are social, instead of individual. That which is produced is a new use-value in which the old exchange-value re-appears. are parts of some lectures given by me on that subject, in 1847, in the German "Arbeiter-Verein" at Brussels, the publication of which was interrupted by the revolution of February. Some of the principal manufacturers in the trade urged that in consequence of the nature of the materials used, and their various processes, they would be unable, without serious loss, to stop for meal-times at any given moment. (Quelle hprreur!) ... For more on this point see my work "Zur Kritik der Pol. 1 "We, the workers of Dunkirk, declare that the length of time of labour required under the present system is too great, and that, tar from leaving the worker time for rest and education, it plunges him into a condition ot servitude but little better than slavery. Com. Od. per diem; while the wages of the weavers on the average of a year, never exceeded 10s. . From fuller em- ployment, and greater exertions, the wages of labour may be considerably increased, while the price of labour may continue the same.'* West, 1. Sixth Report, 1867," p. " 8 James Nasmyth, the eminent civil engineer of Patricroft, near Manchester, explained in a letter to Leonard Horner, written In 1852, the nature of the improvements in the steam-engine 1 Rep. Sometimes under the 12 hours' system they are obliged, on ac- count of the non-appearance of those that ought to relieve them, to work a double turn of 24 hours. What is a loss of value to B is surplus-value to A; what is "minus" to one is "plus" to the other. c, pp. The cause of this imperfection is, apart from indis- tinct notions of value itself, that every change of form in a com- modity results from the exchange of two commodities, an ordinary one and the money-commodity. Later on, and in truth with this very "principle oi population," struck the hour of the Protestant parsons. 434.) HISTORICAL TENDENCY OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 763 its own feet, then the further socialisation of labour and further transformation of the land and other means of production into socially exploited and, therefore, common means of production, as well as the further expropriation of private proprietors, takes a new form. When the process of depopulation has com- pleted itself, the result, says Dr. Hunter, is a show-village where the cottages have been reduced to a few, and where none but persons who are needed as shepherds, gardeners, or game-keepers, are allowed to live; regular servants who receive the good treat- ment usual to their class. Other things remaining unchanged, the capital of £6,000, can, in future, employ no more than 50 men. 64.) "The price of Labour is always consti- tuted of the price of necessaries ... The instrument of labour, when it takes the form of a ma- chine, immediately becomes a competitor of the workman himself. V. Even an ordinary and optimist Free-trader, like Mr. Molinari, goes so far as to say, "Un homme s'use plus vite en surveillant, 3uinze heures par jour, revolution uniforme d'un mecanisme, qu'en exercant, ans le meme espace de temps, sa force physique. But now the cry is everywhere: money alone is a commod- ity! As the hart pants after fresh water, so pants his soul after money, the only wealth. 376 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION driven by man alone. _ Working-day of 12 hours Value created of 6 sh.~ '• These derivative formulae express, in reality, only the pro- portion in which the working-day, or the value produced by it, is divided between capitalist and labourer. . For further details on this point, see Book [I., Part N 3 Fawcett, I. If prices actually differ from values, we must, first of all, reduce the former to the latter, in other words, treat the difference as accidental in order that the phenomena may be observed in their purity, and our observations not interfered with by disturbing circumstances that have nothing to do with the process in ques- tion. It is enough to recall to mind the famine of 1866, which cost the lives of more than a million Hindus in the district of Orissa, in the Bengal presidency. 3 This spontaneous result is often artificially helped along, e.g., in the Engineering Trade of London, a customary trick is "the selecting of a man who possesses superior physical strength and quickness, as the princi- pal of several workmen, and paying him an additional rate, by the quarter or otherwise, with the understanding that he is to exert himself to the ut- most to induce the others, who are only paid the ordinary wages, to keep up to him ... It is the necessity of bringing a natural force under the control of society, of economising, of appropriating or subduing it on a large scale by the work of man's hand, that first plays the decisive part in the history of industry. Time is therefore required for the completion of the se- ries. < . 1859.— 1 in 9. In Germany, especially after the Thirty Years' War, statutes for keeping down wages were general. of yarn; for in i^ths or 16 lbs. . But there is here a technical oneness in the whole system, owing to all the machines receiving their impulse simultaneously, and in an equal degree, from the pulsations of the common prime mover, by the intermediary of the transmitting mechanism; and this mecha- nism, to a certain extent, is also common to them all, since only particular ramifications of it branch off to each machine. Hence the movement directly imparted to money by the circulation of commodities takes the form of a constant motion away from its starting-point, of a course from the hands of one commodity-owner into those of another. The wretched half-starved parents think of nothing but getting as much as possible out of their children. In consequence of the making of railroads in the City, "the spectacle has lately been seen in the East of London of a number of families wandering about some Saturday night with their scanty worldly 1 1. . Od. The sum of £3 19 s. The masters from whom the legal limitation and regula- tion had been wrung step by step after a civil war of half a century, themselves referred ostentatiouslv to the contrast with the branches 1 During 1859 and 1860, the zenith years of the English cotton indus- try, some manufacturers tried, by the decoy bait of higher wages for over- time, to reconcile the adult male operatives to an extension of the working- day. Geddes, a glass manufacturer, still extensively prevail. The bodily form of the linen is now the form assumed in common by the values COMMODITIES 67 of all commodities; it therefore becomes directly exchangeable with all and every of them. 288 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION "Ay, his heart, So says the bond." l This Shylock-clinging to the letter of the law of 1844, so far as it regulated children's labour, was but to lead up to an open revolt against the same law, so far as it regulated the labour of "young persons and women." It will be remembered that the abolition of the "false relay system" was the chief aim and object of that law. The number of males employed in England and Wales, in hat-making, shoemaking, glove-making and tailoring was 437,969; of these 14,964 under 15 years, 89,285 between 15 and 20, and 333,117 over 20 years. This practice has been often noticed in Reports presented to Parliament, as -being attended with great and notorious evils. How, then, to heal the anti-capitalistic cancer of the colo- nies? The first consolation neu- tralises the second. Every individual capital is a larger or smaller concentration of means of production, with a corresponding command over a THE GENERAL LAW OP CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 625 larger or smaller labour-army. c, p. Even its individual consumption is, within certain limits, a mere factor in the process of production. While hoarding, as a distinct mode of acquiring riches, vanishes with the progress of civil so- ciety, the formation of reserves of the means of payment grows with that progress. On this point I will only say further, that Owen's "labour-money," for in- stance, is no more "money" than a ticket for the theatre. (1864). We shall, therefore, in the first place, have to consider the labour-process independently of the particular form it assumes under given social conditions. 48). MACHINERY AMD MODERN INDUSTRY 421 To work at a machine, the workman should be taught from childhood, in order that he may learn to adapt his own move- ments to the uniform and unceasing motion of an automaton. But if Modern Industry, by its very na- ture, therefore necessitates variation of labour, fluency of func- tion, universal mobility of the labourer, on the other hand, in its capitalistic form, it reproduces the old division of labour with its ossified particularisations. . Their numbers have consider- ably increased during the last three or four years, (n.1727.) They are mostly the wives, daughters, and widows of the working miners, and their ages range from 12 to 50 or 60 years, (ns. which performs the most wearisome, the vilest, the most disgusting functions, which takes, in a word, on its shoulders all that is disagreeable and servile in life, and pro- cures thus for other classes leisure, serenity of mind and conven- tional [c'est bon!] dignity of character." 2 Storch asks himself in what then really consist the progress of this capitalistic civili- sation with its misery and its degradation of the masses, as com- pared with barbarism. As the law of 1833 left it optional with the lords of capital during the 15 hours, from 5.30 a. This is ... the other nights." "Another, now 13, . Hence, in order to get rid of the product of one working-day, the demand must be double what it was, i.e., the market must become twice as extensive. The capitalist knows that all commodities, however scurvy they may look, or however badly they may smell, are in faith and in truth money, inwardly circumcised Jews, and what is more, a wonder- ful means whereby out of money to make more money. But let us finish — Mill is willing to concede, "that he should do so is not a matter of inherent necessity."* On the contrary: "the labourer might wait, until the production is complete, for all that part of his wages whicn exceeds mere necessaries; and even for the whole, if he has funds in hand sufficient for his temporary support. c, p. 319, 320. . Labour is the substance, and the immanent measure of value, but has itself no value. 121, p. Leonard Horner has shown in "A Letter to Mr. Senior," &c, London, 1837, that they are worth no more than the so-called "Analysis." Leonard Horner was one of the Factory Inquiry Commissioners in 1833, and Inspec- tor, or rather Censor of Factories till 1859. II., p. The labour, whose utility is thus represented by the value in use of its product, or which mani- fests itself by making its product a use-value, we call useful labour. La- bour-power is the form under which variable capital exists during the process of production. Sic. In the manufacture of carriages, however, all these different artificers are assembled in one building where they work into one another's hands. NATIONAL DIFFERENCES OF WAGES 563 In an "Essay on the Rate of Wages," l one of his first economic writings, H. Three- fourths of the total increase of population has taken place in the towns." ("Census, &c," pp, 11 and 12.) THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 643 The third category of the relative surplus-population, the stagnant, forms a part of the active labour army, but with ex- tremely irregular employment. The minimum of variable capital is the cost price of a single labour-power, employed the whole year through, day in, day out, for the production of surplus-value. Les planteurs, ae pouvant obtenir de leurs sucres un prix suffisant pour couvrir la hausse de salaire, ont 6te obliges de fournir l'excedant, d'abord sur leurs profits, ensuite sur leurs capitaux memes. First we will take the case of a spinning mill containing 10,000 mule spindles, spinning No. 32 yarn from American cotton, and producing 1 lb. Nevertheless, the money relation of debtor and creditor that existed at these two periods reflected only the deeper-lying antagonism between the general economic conditions of existence of the classes in question. The result of the whole process is, so far as concerns the objects themselves, C— C, the exchange of one commodity for 1 "£•/ 6s too .... The capitalist class, as a whole, in any country, cannot over-reach themselves. SECTION 4.— DIFFERENT FORMS OF THE RELATIVE SURPLUS-POPULATION. 1 1. To be the universal equivalent, becomes, by this social process, the specific function of the commodity thus excluded by the rest. 2 Within the process of production, as we have seen, capital acquired the command overlabour, i.e., over functioning labour- power or the labourer himself. If 1 Although the rate of surplus-value is an exact expression for the de- gree of exploitation of labour-power, it is, in no sense, an expression for the absolute amount of exploitation. A comparison of the writings of Chancellor Fortescue and Thomas More reveals the gulf between the 15th and 16th century. Working-day II. The more extended the scale of production, the stronger this motive. In reference to this relation of de- pendence, Sir F. And what is the great trump-card that they play? The original capital was formed by the advance of £10,000. He then did what is done by every purchaser of commodities; he consumed their use-value. 14-15. La celerite" de son mouvement (sc de l'argent) supplee a sa quantite. In the one case, it is the making dependent what was before independent; in the other case, the making independent what was before de- pendent. 11 oz. I, pp. Questionable as it would seem, lo suppose that any trick of the kind would be adopted, the report has been so universal that it really deserves mention." 1 "The amount of purchases or contracts entered upon during the course of any given day, will not affect the quantity of money afloat on that partic- ular day, but, in the vast majority of cases, will resolve themselves into multifarious drafts upon the quantity of money which may be afloat at sub- sequent dates more or less distant.... Here there are not two workmen to each horse-power. 534 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION There is a third formula which I have occasionally already anticipated; it is Surplus-value _ Surplus-la bour _ Unpaid labour ' Value of labour-power - Necessary labour - Paid labour After the investigations we have given above, it is no longer possible to be misled, by the formula p^id labour^ ' into conclud ~ ing, that the capitalist pays for labour and not for labour-power. It is the negation of negation. 721.) "Do you think that the employers would find any fault with a man who obeyed the law. . 132. (1.) A working-day of given length always creates the same amount of value, no matter how the productiveness of labour, and, with it, the mass of the product, and the price of each single commodity produced, may vary. 182 (present edition, p. The immense majority of the popula- tion 1 consisted then, and to a still larger extent, in the 15th century, of free peasant proprietors, whatever was the feudal title under which their right of property was hidden. We are only concerned here with striking and general characteristics; for epochs in the history of society are no more separated from each other by hard and fast lines of demarcation, than are geological epochs. The two poles of the expression of value: Relative form and Equivalent form The whole mystery of the form of value lies hidden in this elementary form. 3 And had we not the testimony of contemporary writers, the sim- ple facts, that during the period between the 16th century and the epoch of Modern Industry, capital failed to become the master of their State are so admirable that the most celebrated philosophers who treat of this subject praise the constitution of the Egyptian State above all others. It may here be incidentally observed, that Descartes, in defining animals as mere machines, saw with eyes of the manufacturing period, while to eyes of the middle ages, animals were assist- ants to man, as they were later to Von Haller in his "Restauration der Staatswissenschaften." That Descartes, like Bacon, anticipated an altera- tion in the form of production, and the practical subjugation of Nature by Man, as a result of the altered methods of thought, is plain from his "Dis- cours de la Methode." He there says: "II est possible (by the meth- ods he introduced in philosophy) de parvenir a des connaissances fort utiles a la vie, et qu'au lieu de cette philosophic speculative qu'on enseigne dans les ecoles, on en peut trouver une pratique, par laquelle, connaissant la force et les actions du feu, de l'eau, de l'air,des astres, et de tous les autres corps qui nous environnent, aussi distinctement que nous connaissons les divers me- tiers de nos artisans, nous les pourrions employer en meme facon a tous les usages auxquels ils sont propres, et ainsi nous rendre comme maitres et pos- sesseurs de la nature" and thus "contribuer au perfectionnement de la vie humaine." In the preface to Sir Dudley North's "Discourses upon Trade" (1691) it is stated, that Descartes' method had begun to free Political Economy from the old fables and superstitious notions of gold, trade, &c. . 11-15, passim.) Herrenschwand's fanciful notions amount merely to this, that the antagonism, which has its origin in the nature of commodi- ties, and is reproduced in their circulation, can be removed by increasing 122 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION hand, by the sum of the prices of the circulating commodities, and on the other hand, by the rapidity with which the anti- thetical phases of the metamorphoses follow one another. In this way commodities express by their prices how much they are worth, and money serves as money of account whenever it is a question of fixing the value of an article in its money-form, 3 The name of a thing is something distinct from the qualities of that thing. Exclusive of vagabonds, crim- inals, prostitutes, in a word, the "dangerous" classes, this layer of society consists of three categories. 28,010,217 30,387,494 32,000,014 NUMBER OF PERSONS EMPLOYED. 7, n. If, then, the capitalistic employment of machinery, on the one hand, supplies new and powerful motives to an excessive lengthening of the working-day, and radically changes, as well the methods of labour, as also the character of the social working organ- ism, in such a manner as to break down all opposition to this tend- ency, on the other hand it produces, partly by opening out to the capitalist new strata of the working-class, previously inaccessible to him, partly by setting free the labourers it supplants, a surplus working population, 2 which is compelled to submit to the dictation 1 Why it is, that the capitalist, and also the political economists who are embued with his views, are unconscious of this immanent contradiction, will appear from the first part of the third book. Princ. former, but not the latter? Given the new value produced = £180, which sum consequently represents the whole labour ex- pended during the process, then subtracting from it £90 the val- ue of the variable capital, we have remaining £90, the amount of the surplus-value. CREATION OF THE HOME-MARKET FOR INDUSTRIAL CAPITAL THe expropriation and expulsion of the agricultural popular tion, intermittent but renewed again and again, supplied, as we saw, the town industries with a mass of proletarians entirely uncon- nected with the corporate guilds and unfettered by them; a for- tunate circumstance that makes old A. Lastly, and for this purpose our friend has a penal code of his own, all wasteful consumption of raw material or instruments of labour is strictly forbidden, because what is so wasted, repre- sents labour superfluously expended, labour that does not count in the product or enter into its value. . What has this been owing to? The English edition is theoret- ically less important, but it contains numerous details referring specifi- cally to English commerce, bullion trade, etc., that are wanting in the French text. Since the fractional product of each detail labourer is, at the same time, only a particular stage in the development of one and the same finished article, each labourer, or each group of labourers, prepares the raw material for another labourer or group. Once engaged in this process, the machine cannot transfer more value than it pos- sesses apart from the process. Even in 1698, Fletcher of Sultoun, declared in the Scotch parliament, "The number of beggars in Scotland is reckoned at not less than 200,000. This peculiar course of modern industry, which occurs in no earlier period of human history, was also impossible in the childhood of capitalist production. 430 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION people employed, * and the alterations caused by all these in the mode of conducting the wholesale trade. We leave out of consideration here any accidental miscal- culation of value by our friend, a mistake that is soon rectified in the market. The second form, B, distinguishes, in a more adequate manner than the first, the value of a commodity from its use-value; for the value of the coat is there placed in contrast under all possible shapes with the bodily form of the coat; it is equated to linen, to iron, to tea, in short, to everything else, only not to itself, the coat. And yet the work of such a Hindu weaver is very complicated, compared with that of a manufactur- ing labourer. is that on which he is most to rely for the repayment of his capital. This is effected in two ways: by increasing the speed of the machin- ery, and by giving the workman more machinery to tent. Each moulder, who is always a skilled labourer, and the chief of a group, supplies his 7 subordinates with board and lodging in his cottage. 1 17 George Street, No. 49 . Whenever therefore a product enters as a means of produc- tion into a new labour-process, it thereby loses its character of product, and becomes a mere factor in the process. 10.) 514 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION of the seasons, which form the physical basis for the social divi- sion of labour, and which, by changes in the natural surroundings, spur man on to the multiplication of his wants, his capabilities, his means and modes of labour. 698 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION Table A LIVE STOCK Year Horses Cattle Total Number Decrease Total Number Decrease Increase 1860 1861 1862 1863 1864 1865- 619,811 614,232 602,894 579,978 562,158 547,867 5,993 11,338 22,916 17,820 14,291 3,606,374 3,471,688 3,254,890 3,144,231 3,262,294 3,493,414 138,316 216,798 110,695 118,063 231,120 Year Sheep Pigs Total Number Decrease Increase Total Number Decrease Increase 1860 1861 1862 1863 1864 1865 3,542,080 3,556,050 3,456,132 3,308,204 3,366,941 3,688,742 99,918 147,982 13,970 58,737 321,801 1,271,072 1,102,042 1,154,324 1,067,458 1,058,480 1,299,893 169,030 86,866 8,978 52,282 241,413 The decrease of the population was naturally accompanied by a decrease in the mass of products. This is centralisation proper, as distinct from accumulation and concentration. have both gone hand in hand in keeping the labourer down." 2 It is then proved in detail that the real agri- cultural wages between 1737 and 1777 fell nearly -7- or 25 per cent. It is not possible to bring out the cretinism of his standpoint, except by his own words: "Les classes condamnees a produire et a consommer diminuent, et les classes qui dirigent le travail, qui soulagent, consolent, et eclairent toute la population, se multiplient . 6 Vols. The underselling masters generally sell their 1 1. It is value, rather, that converts every product into a social hiero- glyphic. Or the Balance of our Foreign Trade is the Rule of our Treasure. The excep- tionally productive labour operates as intensified labour; it creates in equal periods of time greater values than average social labour of the same kind. A machine which does not serve the purposes of labour, is useless. Still, such a return to handicrafts is but a transition to the factory system, which, as a rule, makes its ap- pearance so soon as the human muscles are replaced, for the purpose of driving the machines, by a mechanical motive power, such as steam or water. 1 By putting itself in rela- tion with commodity B, as value in propria persona, as the matter of which human labour is made up, the commodity A converts 1 In a sort of way, it is with man as with commodities. Daire et Molinari in the "Melanges d'Econ. 102. The conversion of money into capital has to be explained on the basis of the laws that regulate the exchange of commodities r in such a way that the starting-point is the exchange of equiva- lents. 2 Especially by piece-work, a form we shall investigate in Part VI. Straw-hat and bonnet-making: 1851, 20,393: 1861, 18,176. So soon as it attains some consistence and extension, it becomes the rec- ognised methodical and systematic form of capitalist production. "The amount of work," say Tremenheere and Tufnell, who drafted the general report, "done by boys, youths, girls, and women, in the course of their daily or nightly spell of labour, is certainly extraordinary." (1. It thus depreciates his labour-power. . It would be foreign to the purpose of this report to enter upon any discussion of the merits of the above apology. lyd., from 20th April to 29th June, 1844, with day of eleven hours, average weekly wages 10s. Doubtless many small guild-masters, and yet more independent small artisans, or even wage-labourers, transformed themselves into small capitalists, and (by gradually extending exploitation of wage-labour and cor- responding accumulation) into full-blown capitalists. is for clothes, and if the parish think proper to fmd clothes, the 3d. Ixvii). But one and the same set of transactions cannot be simultaneously for all owners of commodities both exclu- sively private and exclusively social and general. Each man would want half of this profit." In other words, Messrs. Granted this, it follows that the labour-time necessary for the production of labour-power, or for the reproduction of its value, cannot be lessened by a fall in the labourer's wages below the val- ue of his labour-power, but only by a fall in this value itself. On a very large scale it prevails in practice — prevails .... III., p. Therefore, in the circuit C — M — G, the expenditure of money has nothing to do with its reflux. To have developed from the point of view of natural science, the negative, i.e., destructive side of modern agriculture, is one of Liebig's immortal merits. THE RATE OF SURPLUS-VALUE 221 is due to mere re-appearance in it, of the value of the means of production (20 ibs. But of all coun- tries England again furnishes the classical example, because it holds the foremost place in the world-market, because capital- ist production is here alone completely developed, and lastly, because the introduction of the Free-trade millennium since 1846 has cutoff the last retreat of vulgar economy. 1, p. Answer: Because the Hindus bury their money. c, p. 5d. Hence, e.g., in 1860 a great strike among the ribbon-weavers of Coventry. In proportion as exchange bursts its local bonds, and the value of commodities more and more expands into an embodi- ment of human labour in the abstract, in the same proportion the character of money attaches itself to commodities that are by Nature fitted to perform the social function of a universal equiv- alent. 1 Long before the period of Modern Industry, co-operation and the concentration of the instruments of labour in the hands of a few, gave rise, in numerous countries where these methods were applied in agriculture, to great, sudden and forcible revolutions in the modes of production, and conse- quentially, in the conditions of existence, and the means of employ- ment of the rural populations. Then the new capital of £2,000 functions in the spinning-mill, and brings in, in its turn, a surplus-value of £400. Here the thing produced by each of them is but a step towards the final form, which is the product of all their labours combined. India Trade," bring out the capitalist character of division of labour as applied in manufacture more than A. 13, 53, 59, etc. Londres, 1769. But a reaction set in. 4 The independent form, i.e., the money-form, which the value of commodities assumes in the case of simple circulation, serves only one purpose, namely, their exchange, and vanishes in the final result of the movement. In the last decades of the 17th century it had already been shown that money is a commodity, but this step marks only the infancy of the analysis. Nevertheless, and exclusive of the terrible death-rate of children in the first years of their life, the official reports of Dr. Greenhow show the unfa- vourable health condition of the manufacturing districts as compared with "agricultural districts of normal health." As evidence, take the following table from his 1861 report: — ^J „_, a 3.S n 6° 3 -CT3 <• bo « 2<o <- o z<§ 5 S • <U W 3 v£~* Name of District. But in proportion, as the export of cotton became of vital inter- est to these states, the over-working of the negro and some- times the using up of his life in 7 years of labour became a fac- tor in a calculated and calculating system. If we may take an example from outside the sphere of production of material objects, a schoolmaster is a productive labourer, when, in addition to bela- bouring the heads of his scholars, he works like a horse to enrich the school proprietor. A part of the functioning constant capital consists of instruments of labour, such as machinery, &c, which are not consumed, and therefore not reproduced, or replaced by new ones of the same kind, until after long periods of time. But assuming that he is acting simply as a motor, that a machine has taken the place of his tool, it is evident that he can be replaced by natural forces. Our friend gained 10 as a seller only to lose it again as a buyer. . c, p. . 54.) 2 Eden should have asked, whose creatures then are "the civil insti- tutions"? It is a common tradition in Lancash ire, that the beds never get cold." 1 1 John Fielden, 1. 3 1. We take the total value of the product and put the constant capital which merely re-appears in it, equal to zero. Although there is no absolute change in the value of labour-power, it suffers a relative fall. (Law of 18th March, 1851.) "No minor who has attained the age of 12 years, and is under the age of 15 years, shall be employed in any manufacturing establishment more than 11 hours in any one day, nor before 5 o'clock in the morning, nor after 7.30 in the evening " ("Revised Statutes of the State of Rhode Island," &c, ch. Everywhere the farmers were howling, and the London Econo- mist, with reference to these starvation-wages, prattled quite seriously of "a general and substantial advance." 1 What did the farmers do now? There remain 3 half- hours, which yield 3/23X^1 15,000=^15,000 or the gross profit. The labourers are first driven from the land, and then come the sheep. But the Saviours of Society would not 1 Reports, &c, for 30th April, 1849, pp. The best of it is that Carey, a great Russophile by the way, wants to prevent the process of separation by that very system of protec- tion which accelerates it. But, suppose, besides, that the making of the new machin- ery affords employment to a greater number of mechanics, can 1 Ricardo originally was also of this opinion, but afterwards expressly disclaimed it, with the scientific impartiality and love of truth character- istic of him. And though the use-value of a commodity is more serviceable to the buyer than to the seller, its money-form is more serviceable to the seller. Why cannot he get a price? 4 The "spirit" of Protestantism may be seen from the following, among other things. "Every man should have at least 800 cubic feet." (Huxley.) 2 According to the English Factory Act, parents cannot send their chil- dren under 14 years of age into Factories under the control of the Act, unless at the same time they allow them to receive elementary education. (Isocrates, Bosiris, c. Massie. B. 2 Ibidem. It is the expenditure of simple labour-power, i.e., of the labour-power which, on ^n average, apart from any special development, exists in the organism of every ordinary individual. "In 1782," as Frederick Engels teaches us, "all the wool crop in England of the three preceding years, lay untouched for want of labourers, and so it must have lain, if newly invented machinery had not come to its aid and spun it." 1 Labour embodied in the form of machinery of course did not di- rectly force into life a single man, but it made it possible for a smaller number of labourers, with the addition of relatively less living labour, not only to consume the wool productively, and put into it new value, but to preserve in the form of yarn, &c, its old value. per week when working the ordinary hours ... II 2 Bentham is a purely English phenomenon. Wages, therefore, in reality fell. 18. Now, when the fatal year, 1862, came, the old farce was repeated. It raged on through- out the whole manufacturing period. Because the Factory Acts made two sets of children necessary, one working six hours, the other four, or each working five hours. It comes out of circulation, enters into it again, preserves and multiplies itself within its circuit, comes back out of it with expanded bulk, and begins the same THE GENERAL FORMULA FOR CAPITAL 155 round ever afresh. He will remember that as far as we have at present gone, only the independent la- bourer, and therefore only the labourer legally qualified to act for himself, enters as a vendor of a commodity into a contract with the capitalist. . i.,p. . xi, n. . Wherever, therefore, circumstances allowed it, a reduction of wages of at least 25% took place. But in the first case the value of the machine would be repro- duced twice as quickly as in the latter, and the capitalist would, by this use of the machine, absorb in 1-^ years as much surplus- value as in the second case he would in 15. Working-day III. prevailed in the 17th century to an extent which, when compared with the extent of the manufacturing system, seems almost incredible. Modern Domestic Industry I now come to the so-called domestic industry. They count merely as depositories of so much absorbed or materialised labour; that labour, whether previously embodied in the means of production, or incorporated in them for the first time during the process by the action of labour-power, counts in either case only according to its duration; it amounts to so many hours or days as the case may be. A large number of accidents are caused by the eagerness of the workpeople to get through their work expedi- tiously. As the system of protection at its origin 2 attempted to manufacture capitalists artificially in the mother-country, so Wakefield's colonisation theory, which England tried for a time to enforce by Acts of Parliament, at- tempted to effect the manufacture of wage-workers in the Colonies. And the first birthright of capital is equal exploitation of labour-power by all capitalists. pp. About a year ago, Mr. Jay promised to appropriate a hut, to which persons in his employ, who were suffering from conta- gious diseases, might at once be removed. On the other hand, it is absolutely false to say that "profits will be 20%." They will always be less, because they are calculated upon the sum total of the capital advanced. xvii. It is just as if the cotton had converted itself into yarn, without help; as if the shape it had assumed was mere trickery and deceit: for so soon as our capitalist sells it for 24s., and with the money replaces his means of production, it becomes evident that this 16 lbs. With richer mines, the same quantity of labour would embody itself in more diamonds, and their value would fall. .£1,000,000 "Report from the Select Committee on the Bank Acts, July, 1858," p. E. xviii.) "In Birmingham ... As a special method of producing relative surplus-value, it remains effective only, first, in so far ABSOLUTE AND RELATIVE SURPLUS-VALUE 511 as it seizes upon industries that previously were only formally subject to capital, that is, so far as it is propagandist; secondly, in so far as the industries that have been taken over by it, continue to be revolutionised by changes in the methods of production. The incredible adulteration of bread, especially in London, was first revealed by the House of Commons Committee "on the adulteration of articles of food" (1855-56), and Dr. Has- sall's work, "Adulterations detected." 2 The consequence of these revelations was the Act of August 6th, 1860, "for preventing the adulteration of articles of food and drink," an inoperative law, as it naturally shows the tenderest consideration for every Free- trader who determines by the buying or selling of adulterated commodities "to turn an honest penny." 3 The Committee itself formulated more or less naively its conviction that Free-trade meant essentially trade with adulterated, or as the English in- 1 I. This is a great error, as the latter alone make a really important object of national prosperity . Moreover, only so much of the time spent in the production of any article is counted, as, under the given social conditions, is necessary. 508 PART Y THE PRODUCTION OF ABSOLUTE AND OF RELATIVE SURPLUS-VALUE CHAPTER XVI ABSOLUTE AND RELATIVE SURPLUS-VALUE In considering the labour-process, we began (see Chapter VII.) by treating it in the abstract, apart from its historical forms, as a process between man and Nature. Empl. Econ.," &.c. Every minute's stoppage is not only a loss of power, but of produc- tion, and the workpeople are urged by the overlookers, who are interested in the quantity of work turned off, to keep the machinery in motion; and it is no less important to those of the operatives who are paid by the weight or piece, that the machines should be kept in motion. "Mankind having consented to put an imaginary value upon gold and silver ... This is done by the gangs, or organ- ised bands that dwell in the open villages. By this action it destroys at the same time the health of the town labourer and the intellectual life of the rural labourer. 4 This gradually brings on a reaction like that already described in time-wages, without reckoning that the pro- longation of the working-day, even if the piece-wage remains con- stant, includes of necessity a fall in the price of the labour. 9d. This effect, however, has nothing in common with the so-called theory of compensation. The currency 2 of money The change of form, C — M — G, by which the circulation of the material products of labour is brought about, requires that a given value in the shape of a commodity shall begin the process, and shall, also in the shape of a commodity, end it. This will always be diminished when the necessaries of life grow cheaper." (1. . . Beyond this limit the working-time is over-time, and is, taking the hour as unit-measure, paid better ("extra pay"), although often in a proportion ridiculously small. 1 "Factory labour may be as pure and as excellent as domestic labour, and perhaps more so." ("Rep. 1860.-204,141,168 Jbs. 3 1. From 1815 to 1821 depression; 1822 and 1823 pros- perity; 1824 abolition of the laws against Trades' Unions, great extension of factories everywhere; 1825 crisis; 1826 great misery and riots among the factory operatives; 1827 slight improvement; 1828 great increase in power-looms, and in exports; 1829 exports, as to which could turn out the neatest article. Wherever the sewing-machine lo- cates itself in narrow and already over-crowded workrooms, it adds to the unwholesome influences. The training which they give to an apprentice is considered as part of the return for the boys' labour, and thus enables the men to get it at a cheaper rate. A relatively thinly populated coun- try, with well-developed means of communication, has a denser population than a more numerously populated country, with bad- 1 Sir James Steuart is the economist who has handled this subject best. One sort of article requires a longer, another a shorter time for its production. Ill, p. In these cases, however, the money always acts as a means of purchase.... Money as a measure of value JL J_s the phenomenal form that must of necessity be assumed by that measure of value which is immanent in commodities, laboUr-fcrmeT^ 1 The question — Why does not money directly represent labour-time, so that a piece of paper may represent, for instance, x hours' labour, is at bottom the same as the question why, given the production of commodities, must products take the form of commodities? Final- ly, we have considered this question entirely apart from the fact, that everywhere, except in the metal industries, young persons (under 18), and women and children form the preponderating ele- ment in the class of factory hands. The so-called primitive accumulation, therefore, is nothing else than the historical process of divorcing the producer from the means of production. 267, 291. Hence their variety, which is such, that in the best London houses scarcely a dozen watches are made alike in the course of a year. 3 Legal limitation of the working-day puts an end to these amenities. 125-130, p. 124 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION metals in a country; 1 this opinion was based by those who first held it, on the absurd hypothesis that commodities are without a price, and money without a value, when they first enter into circu- lation, and that, once in the circulation, an aliquot part of the medley of commodities is exchanged for an aliquot part of the heap of precious metals. Who are the consumers?" (G. Eating is abstinence from fasting, walking, ab- stinence from standing still, working, abstinence from idling, idling, absti- CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO CAPITAL 597 sample this, of the discoveries of vulgar economy! It substitutes for an economic category, a sycophantic phrase— voild tout. It there- by reproduces and perpetuates the condition for exploiting the la- bourer. 215, 319, 320. It establishes an accumulation of misery, corre- sponding with accumulation of capital. Appendix, p. Take as an example the labour of a bricklayer, which in England occupies a much higher level than that of damask-weaver. of yarn=the value of 40 lbs. 1863," p. Paris, 1823, p. Harrison, in his "Descrip- tion of England, prefixed to Holinshed's Chronicles," describes how the expropriation of small peasants is ruining the country. 2 "My knowledge of such evils," says Dr. Simon, the medical officer of the Privy Council and editor in chief of the Reports on Public Health, "may excuse the profound misgiving with which I regard any large industrial employment of adult women." 3 "Hap- py indeed," exclaims Mr. Baker, the factory inspector, in his official report, "happy indeed will it be for the manufacturing districts of England, when every married woman having a family is prohibited from working in any textile works at all." 4 The moral degradation caused by the capitalistic exploita- tion of women and children has been so exhaustively depicted by F. Each of them, so far as it is exchange-value, must therefore be reducible to this third. 88,901,519 lbs. It begins with the revolt of the Netherlands from Spain, assumes giant dimensions in England's Anti-Jacobin War, and is still going on in the opium wars against China, &c. In so far as the machine has value, and, in consequence, parts with value to the product, it forms an element in the value of that product. If it employs a smaller number, that of the supernumeraries increases; if it employs a greater, the general demand for labour only increases to the extent of the excess of the employed over those "set free." The impulse that additional capital, seeking an outlet, would otherwise have given to the general demand for labour, is therefore in every case neutralised to the extent of the labourers thrown out of employ- ment by the machine. THE INCOME-TAX ON THE SUBJOINED 1860 18*61 Schedule A. It began by being £100, it is now £110, and so on. 1864, p. Hence at the end of the 15th and during the whole of the 16th century, throughout Western Europe a bloody legislation against vagabondage. During the 15 hours of the factory day, capital dragged in the labourer now for 30 minutes, now for an hour, and then pushed him out again, to drag him into the factory and to thrust him out afresh, hounding him hither and thither, in scat- tered shreds of time, without ever losing hold of him until the full 10 hours' work was done. c, 4th February, 1866. 2 To the question, "If there were occasion to raise 40 millions p. 2 Translator's nite. 2 See the official accounts in the Blue book: "Miscellaneous Statistics of the United Kingdom," Part vi"., London, 1866, pp. "Gold is a wonderful thing! Whoever possesses it is lord of all he wants. This Fetishism of commodities has its origin, as the foregoing analysis has already shown, in the peculiar social character of the labour that produces them. "He" (the man out of work) "may be told the supply of cotton- workers is too large .... On the other hand, the use of a given commodity, of a house, for instance, is sold (in common parlance, let) for a definite period. c, p. "Bristol, where the blankest poverty and domestic misery abound in the wealthiest town of Europe." 2 (c.) The Nomad Population We turn now to a class of people whose origin is agricultural, but whose occupation is in great part industrial. 155.) "L'argent est un signe d'une chose et la represente." (Montesquieu: "Esprit des Lois," (CEuvres, Lond. The capitalist mode of appropriation, the result of the capi- talist mode of production, produces capitalist private property. 244 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION wearing away, their frames dwindling, their faces whitening, and their humanity absolutely sinking into a stone-like torpor, utterly horrible to contemplate We are not sur- prised that Mr. Mallett, or any other manufacturer, should stand forward and protest against discussion The system, as the Rev. 141, note.) A fine science of economy this, which declares it impossible to resolve the price of a commodity into its simplest elements! This point will be further investi- gated in the seventh part of Book iii. This I call the Fetishism which attaches itself to the products of labour, so soon as they are produced as commod- ities, and which is therefore inseparable from the production of commodities. Even the fanatical advocate of the system of large farms, the author of the "Inquiry into the Connexion between the Present Price of Provisions," London, 1773, p, 139, says: "I most lament the loss of our yeomanry, that set of men who really kept up the independence of this nation; and sorry I am to see their lands now in the hands of monopolising lords, tenanted out to small farmers, who hold their leases on such conditions as to be little better than vassals ready to attend a summons on every mischievous occasion." 2 On the private moral character of this bourgeois hero, among other things: "The large grant of lands in Ireland to Lady Orkney, in 1695, is a pub- lic instance of the king's affection, and the lady's influence... There is no difference or distinction in things of equal value.... There never was a hesitation as to the answer."... 1866, p. The 3 other days he does forced work on the lord's domain. Smith does. If the mass of commodities remain constant, the quantity of circulating money varies with the fluctuations in the prices of those commodities. III. The historical conditions of its existence are by no means given with the mere circulation of money and commodities. With the four shillings and sixpence which he produces in nine hours, he commands one-tenth less of the nec- essaries of life than before, and consequently the proper reproduc- tion of his labour-power is crippled. Such conditions, together with the prosperity of the towns so characteristic of the 15th century, allowed of that wealth of the people which Chancellor Fortescue so eloquently paints in his "Laudes legum Angliae"; but it excluded the possibility of capitalistic wealth. If now the business extends, and the total capital employed grows to £1,500 under un- changed conditions, the number of operatives employed will in- crease to 300, just as many as before the introduction of the ma- chinery. This being so, let us return to the formula C = c+v, which we saw was transformed into C'=(c+v)+s, C becoming C\ We know that the value of the constant capital is transferred to, and merely re-appears in the product. At first the rights of property seemed to us to be based on a man's own labour. The result he arrives at, is precisely that proposition of Ri- cardo that he aimed at disproving. A single vio- lin player is his own conductor; an orchestra requires a sep- arate one. 4 Thus the Factory Inspectors at last venture to say: "These objections (of capital to the legal limitation of the working-day) must succumb before the broad principle of the rights of labour... 2 These judicial farces, exclaims Inspector Howell, "urgently call for a remedy- either that the law should be so altered as to be made to conform to these decisions, or that it should be administered by a less fallible tribunal, whose decisions would conform to the law . 28. (Epi- tomised in part by Carey in "The Slave Trade." Philadelphia, 1853, pp. "The Principles of Pol. daily; and since then, the efficacy of the gin has been considerably increased. So far therefore as labour is a creator of use-value, is useful labour, it is a necessary condition, independent of all forms of society, for the existence of the human race; it is an eternal nature- COMMODITIES 43 imposed necessity, without which there can be no material ex- changes between man and Nature, and therefore no life. The law of capitalistic accu- Cf. Karl Marx: "Zur Kritik der Politischen Oekonomie," pp. And at the finish he is quite astonished to find that Destutt on the one hand agrees with him as to labour being the source of value, and on the other hand with J. 320.) 580 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION find in the market the necessaries of life whose value the master has advanced to them. (Man himself, viewed as the impersonation of labour- power, is a natural object, a thing, although a. Greg, 1837. A smaller proportion of what he produces is sufficient to put that labour into motion, and a larger proportion 1 consequently re- mains for himself." ("Outlines of Pol. But to preach slavery of the masses, in order that a few 1 F. A flying column of pestilence, it carries into the places in whose neighbourhood it pitches its camp, small-pox, typhus, cholera, scarlet fever, &c. Econ." London, 1853, p. But we have already seen that, with every ad- vance in the use of machinery, the constant component of capital, that part which consists of machinery, raw material, &c, increases, while the variable component, the part laid out in labour-pow- er, decreases. A greater quantity of labour, done by the same number of labourers as be- fore, thus increases the fertility, without requiring any new advance in the instruments of labour. Stuart allowed the so-called relay system during the 15 hours of the factory day throughout Scotland, where it soon flourished again as of old. (What generosity!) There is no waste of pa- per and colour to speak of. At the head of these in importance, stands the self-acting mule, because it opened up a new epoch in the automatic system. According as we read this equation forwards or backwards, the parts played by the linen and the coat are different. If the special productive labour of the workman were not spinning, he could not convert the cotton into yarn, and there- fore could not transfer the values of the cotton and spindle to the yarn. In 1832, the distance travelled in following a pair of mules, spinning cotton yarn of the same number, was 20 miles, and frequently more. 1 But more especially, the revolution in the modes of production of industry and agriculture made necessary a revolution in the general conditions of the social process of production, i.e., in the means of communication and of transport. But it secured to them, on the other hand, the privilege of working children between 11 and 13, 10 hours a day, and of annulling in their case the education made compulsory for all other factory children. It is an ex- pression as imaginary as the value of the earth. Diodorus long ago remarked this in relation to the ancient Egyptians. The hour struck for the advent of machinery. According to one of the lists laid before Parliament, the Company and its employes from 1757- 1766 got £6,000,000 from the Indians as gifts. Nomad races are the first to develop the money-form, because all their worldly goods consist of moveable objects and are therefore directly alienable; and be- cause their mode of life, by continually bringing them into con- tact with foreign communities, solicits the exchange of products. No one made a greater outcry over "impossibilities" than our friends the earthenware manufacturers. One can walk from the Earl of Dal- housie's estates in Forfarshire to John o'Groats, without ever leaving forest land.... Let the value of the linen vary, x that of the coat remaining constant. 'One of the finest sheep farms in Sutherlandshire, for which EXPROPRIATION OF AGRICULTURAL POPULATION 733 less terrorism, were just so many idyllic methods of primitive accumulation. (Maurer, Fronhofe iv. 'Nothing have they done, sir,' said the woman, pointing to her boys, 'for six and twenty weeks; and all our money gone — all the twenty pounds that me and father saved when times were better, thinking g70 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION it would yield a little to keep us when we got past work. Answer of the legislature: A thing is produced "when it is made," and it is made when it is ready for sale. Cochrane, of the Britain Pottery, Glasgow, report: "To keep up our quantity we have gone exten- MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 475 stitution of steam as a motive power in the place of muscles. 2 The parliamentary form of the robbery is that of Acts for enclosures of Commons, in other words, decrees by which the land- lords grant themselves the people's land as private property, decrees of expropriation of the people. 2 Wales here is always included in England. One tree commonly yields 300 lbs., and occasionally 500 to 600 lbs. surplus-labour closes to us, by means of its equivalent expression, - r-v — J ^ r ' necessary labour the relation between the two parts of the working-day. Generally the gang- master pays up in a public house; then he returns home at the head of the procession reeling drunk, propped up right and left by a stalwart virago, while children and young persons bring up the rear, boisterous, and singing chaffing and bawdy songs. . Hence, in this process which continually makes money pass from hand to hand, the mere symbolical existence of money suffices. o If the value of 30s. The majority of those who did not obtain milk were needle-women in London. In consequence of the civil war in the United States and of the accompanying cotton famine, the majority of the cotton operatives in Lancashire were, as is well known, thrown out of work. 2 Report of 1864 disclosed the deficiency of fat-forming food among a large part of the working-class, a certain Dr. Harvey (not, however, the celebrat- ed discoverer of the circulation of the blood), made a good thing by adver- tising recipes for reducing the superfluous fat of the bourgeoisie and aris- tocracy. 1 From the law of the rapidity of currency of the means of payment, it follows that the quantity of the means of payment required for all periodical payments, whatever their source, is in inverse proportion to the length of their periods. of Java: "The History of Java." Lond., 1817, Vol. Spinning by machinery, for example, supplied yarn so cheaply and so abundantly that the hand-loom weavers were, at first, able to work full time with- out increased outlay. Smith, pp. When occupying the position of equivalent in the equation of value, the coat ranks qualitatively as the equal of the linen, as something of the same kind, because it is value. 29. But industrial capital too is money, that is changed into commodi- ties, and by the sale of these commodities, is re-converted into more money. of Book III. The secret of the expression of value, namely, that all kinds of labour are equal and equivalent, because, and so far as they are human labour in general, cannot be deciphered, until the notion of human equality has already acquired the fixity of a popular prejudice. . In the preceding investigation we have treated the total product as the final result, ready for use, of a working-day of 12 hours. — This word is here used in its original significa- tion of the course or track pursued by money as it changes from hand to hand, a course which essentially differs from circulation. 130-133, n. of coffee. 5. till 12 p. In those branches of industry in which the machinery system is first introduced, Manufacture itself furnishes, in a general way, the natural basis for the division, and consequent organisation, of the process of production. c, pp. These hours are, indeed, in some cases, not only cruelly but even incredibly long for children. In the third part of Book II. "I may make over to another the use, for a limited time, of my particular bodily and mental aptitudes and capabil- ities; because, in consequence of this restriction, they are impressed with a character of alienation with regard to me as a whole. A close scrutiny of the expression of the value of A in terms of B, contained in the equation expressing the value-relation of A to B, has shown us that, within that relation, the bodily form of A figures only as a use-value, the bodily form of B only as the form or aspect of value. Take, for instance, the manufacture of glass bottles. During the last five or six years it had been screwed up to 14, 18, and 20 hours, and under a specially severe pressure of holiday-makers, at times of excursion trains, it often lasted for 40 or 50 hours without a break. He "ran moulds" (carried ready-moulded ar- ticles into the drying-room, afterwards bringing back the empty mould) from the beginning. But the worker has received payment for the exchange-value of his labour-power and by so doing has ali- enated its use-value — this being the case in every sale and purchase. This additional corvee is estimated at 14 days for each Wallachian peasant. By making the coat the equivalent of the linen, we equate the labour embodied in the former to that in the latter. Moreover, the human machinery will, as we have just seen, get the steam up of its own accord, and burst or run amuck in our great towns. But the place occupied by these branches in the general production is, even in the most developed countries, far from important. The latter pre-supposes that the working-day is already divided into 'wo parts, necessary labour, and surplus-labour. To perpetuate it would be, as Pec- queur rightly says, "to decree universal mediocrity." At a cer- tain stage of development it brings forth the material agencies for its own dissolution. 9 1 Ure, 1. But as we have seen, during that portion of his day's labour in which he produces the value of his labour-power, say three shil- lings, he produces only an equivalent for the value of his labour- power already advanced 2 by the capitalist; the new value created only replaces the variable capital advanced. On a vu les simples travailleurs exploiter a leur tour les entrepreneurs d'industrie, exiger d'eux des salaires hors de toute pro- portion avec la part legitime qui leur revenait dans le produit. Therefore, the larger capi- tals beat the smaller. 3 J. The accidents, both as regards number and kind, are wholly unexampled in the history of machinery. The facts that lie at the bottom of this dogma are these: on the one hand, the la- bourer has no right to interfere in the division of social wealth into means of enjoyment for the non-labourer and means of production. Gould com- modities themselves speak, they would say: Our use-value may be a thing that interests men. c, pp. the creator of all wealth, no commodity". 1 7 ^ „ Back Pratt Street, used as a brazier's shop . without over-time they could not earn a fair day's wages." ("Rept. 378, 379, 380.) V. 130, n. m. We also know that in no other system of produc- tion is improvement so continuous, and the composition of the capital employed so constantly changing as in the factory system. It is clear, however, that air which has been once breathed, can no longer serve for the same process until it has been purified in the great workshop of Nature. Since the producers' do not come into social contact with each other until they exchange their products, the specific social character of each producer's labour does not show itself except in the act of exchange. . which the working of the Ten Hours' Act has brought to light." ("Rep. 2 In addition to this, it would throw night-labour on those who worked instead of the boys, which they would not be able to stand. "In Birmingham there is so much competition of masters one against another, that many are ob- liged to do things as employers that they would otherwise be ashamed of; and yet no more money is made, but only the public gets the benefit." 2 The reader will remember the two sorts of Lon- don bakers, of whom one sold the bread at its full price (the "full- priced" bakers), the other below its normal price ("the underpriced," "the undersellers"). 34.) 568 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION by him. Since the capital produces yearly a surplus- value, of which one part is yearly added to the original capital; since this increment itself grows yearly along with the augmenta- tion of the capital already functioning; since lastly, under spe- cial stimulus to enrichment, such as the opening of new markets, or of new spheres for the outlay of capital inconsequence of newly developed social wants, &c, the scale of accumulation may be suddenly extended, merely by a change in the division of the sur- plus-value or surplus-product into capital and revenue, the re- quirements of accumulating capital may exceed the increase of labour-power or of the number of labourers; the demand for labour- ers may exceed the supply, and, therefore, wages may rise. to the industry of others. represent the value of the raw material, the 20s. Hence they were noted "with exultation" as especially worthy of remark and as wonders by the far-seeing "amis du bommeree" and recommended as models for their own time and for posterity. • I. The value of the commodity linen is expressed by the bodily form of the commodity coat, the value of one by the use-value of the other. 3d. xvi. Given the individual, the production of labour-power consists in his reproduction of himself or his maintenance. " (Rob. 235-314 passim. To assert that the surplus-value acquired by the producer has its origin in the fact that consumers pay for commodities more than their value, is only to say in other words: The owner of commodities possesses, as a seller, the 1 "By the augmentation of the nominal value of the produce ... Each detail machine supplies raw material to the machine next in order; and since they are all working at the same time, the product is always going through the various stages of its fabrication, and is also constantly in a state of transition, from one phase to another. And modern economy, which looks down with such disdain on the monetary an economy, which just as much constituted the material basis of their world, as bourgeois economy constitutes that of our modern world. 248.) 530 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION (2.) Increasing intensity and productiveness of labour with simultaneous shortening of the working-day Increased productiveness and greater intensity of labour, both have a like effect. . This threw, at the same time, an official cloak over British smug- gling. s. Tailoring and weav- ing are necessary factors in the creation of the use-values, coat and linen, precisely because these two kinds of labour are of differ- ent qualities; but only in so far as abstraction is made from their special qualities, only in so far as both possess the same quality of being human labour, do tailoring and weaving form the sub- stance of the values of the same articles. It cannot, however, serve as an example of the first kind of genuine manufacture, for it is a structure produced by modern mechanical industry. But when it comes to regulating the so-called "home-labour," 1 it is immedi- ately viewed as a direct attack on the patria potestas, on parental authority. F. Within certain limits therefore the supply of labour exploitable by capital is independent of the supply of labourers. The master's machinery real- ly plays a far more important part in the business of produc- tion than the labour and the skill of the operative, which six months' education can teach, and a common labourer can learn." 2 The technical subordination of the workman to the uniform motion of the instruments of labour, and the peculiar composition of the body of workpeople, consisting as it does of individuals of both sexes and of all ages, give rise to a barrack discipline, which 1 F. 59.) The writer here alludes to the Preston factory opera- tives, who were employed on Preston Moor. 6 1. The bourgeois economist whose narrow mind is unable to separate the form of appearance from the thing that appears, shuts his eyes to the fact, that it is but here and there on the face of the earth, that even now-a-days the labour-fund crops up in the form of capital. The intensity and productiveness of labour being given, the time which society is bound to devote to material production is shorter, and as a consequence, the time at its disposal for the free development, intellectual and social, of the individual is greater, in proportion as the work is more and more evenly divid- ed among all the able-bodied members of society, and as a par- ticular class is more and more deprived of the power to shift the natural burden of labour from its own shoulders to those of an- other layer of society. the majority of weavers are working at a reduction of 30 to 40 per cent, in their wages. (Adam Smith, Book I., chapter 8.) So far, we have only considered one special phase of this process, that in which the increase of capital occurs along with a constant technical com- position of capital. The Queen's son is the Princess Alexandra. It requires for its free play an indus- trial reserve army independent of these natural limits. 9.) 8 "Remarks on the Commercial Policy of Great Britain," London, 1815. Use-values cannot con- front each other as commodities, unless the useful labour em- bodied in them is qualitatively different in each of them. 2 But on this apparently decisive victory of capital, followed at once a revulsion. With adequate profit, capital is very bold. 5 4 9 " 10. Then we have rate of surplus-value i-=|i^=100%. In the ancient Asiatic and other ancient modes of production, we find that the conversion of products into commodities, and therefore the conversion of men into pro- ducers of commodities, holds a subordinate place, which, however, increases in importance as the primitive communities approach nearer and nearer to their dissolution. FLAX & HEMP Yarn Cloth SILK Yarn Cloth WOOL Woollen and ^ Worsted yarn3 / Cloth lbs. 2 "L'ouvrier demandait de la subsistence pour vivre, le chef deman- dait du travail pour gagner." (Sismondi, 1. This part forms his variable capital. 889.) 4 "Nothing can have an intrinsick value." (N. Given a machine's capacity for work, that is, the number of its operating tools, or, where it is a question of force, their mass, the amount of its product will depend on the velocity of its work- ing parts, on the speed, for instance, of the spindles, or on the num- ber of blows given by the hammer in a minute. II. 115, 116). On this sup- position, the 23 half-hours yield an annual product of £1 15,000; one half- hour yields 1/23X^115,000; 20 half-hours yield 20/23x^115,000=^100,000, i.e., they replace no more than the capital advanced. From our present standpoint it therefore seems likely that the capitalist, once upon a time, became possessed of money, by some accumula- tion that took place independently of the unpaid labour of others, and that this was, therefore, how he was enabled to frequent the market as a buyer of labour-power. But there was a nominal reduction, of which the operatives, it is asserted, had not fair warning beforehand." 3 "Trades' Unions, in their desire to maintain wages, endeavour to share in the benefits of improved machinery. The stream of emigration was only diverted from the English colonies to the United States. In the same way the light from an object is perceived by us not as the subjective excitation of our optic nerve, but as the objective form of something outside the eye itself. Malthus," Paris, 1820, pp. Centralisation, on the contrary, accomplished this in the twinkling of an eye, by means of joint-stock companies. Besides, where nothing is, the king has lost his rights; whatever may be the merit of his abstinence, there is nothing wherewith specially to remu- nerate it, because the value of the product is merely the sum of the values of the commodities that were thrown into the process of pro- duction. . The rate of surplus- value, or the degree of exploitation of labour-power, and the value of labour-power, or the amount of necessary working-time being given, it is self-evident that the greater the variable capital, the greater would be the mass of the value produced and of the surplus- value. We find this individual difference, but are not deceived by it, in the system of slavery, where, frankly and openly, without any circumlocution, labour-power itself is sold. The extension B G of the line A B represents the length of the surplus-labour. c, p. Wherefore, supposing payments in general to be of a mixed circle between one week and 13, then add 10 millions to r^, the half of which will be 5-7p, so as if we have 5-y millions we have enough." (William Petty: "Political Anatomy of Ireland." 1672. Those that get their living by their daily labour . So far as the labour-statutes aim at compulsory extension of the working-day, I do not return to them, as this point was treated earlier (Chap. A rise or a fall in the prices of a number of leading articles, is sufficient in the one case to increase in the other to diminish, the sum of the prices of all commodities, and, therefore, to put more or less money in circulation. With the revival of trade came of course an overflow from the waves of the ever fluctuating "reserve army" or "relative surplus-popula- tion." The frightful cellar habitations and rooms registered in the list, 1 which Dr. Hunter obtained from the agent of an Insurance 1 COLLECTING AGENTS LIST (BRADFORD) Houses Vulcan Street, No. 122 . My guide was a member of the Committee of the Unemployed My first call was on an ironworker who had been seven and twenty weeks out of employment. 2 Given the length of the working-day, all other circumstances remaining the same, the exploitation of double the number of workmen demands, not only a doubling of that part of constant capital which is invested in machinery and buildings, but also of that part which is laid out in raw material and auxiliary sub- stances. As Thornton rightly has it, the English working-class was precipitated without any transition from its golden into its iron age. Senior says, with other things, 712 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION Like all good things in this bad world, this profitable method has its drawbacks. c, p. Abbe Lancellotti, in a work that appeared in Venice in 1636, but which was written in 1579, says as follows: "Anthony Miiller of Danzig saw about 50 years ago in that town, a very in- genious machine, which weaves 4 to 6 pieces at once. In all, 42 corvee days. He was able to rear his pig and keep fowl . 3 On the other hand, the French law proclaims as a principle that which in England was only won in the name of children, minors, and women, and has been only recently for the first time claimed as a general right. LaBt uns leben das Leben der Vater, und lafit uns der Gaben Arbeitslos uns freun, welche die Gottin uns schenkt.'" (Gedichte aus dem Griechischen iibersetzt von Christian Graf zo Stolberg, Hamburg, 1782.) MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 409 crude and half-educated parvenus, might become "eminent spin- ners," "extensive sausage-makers," and "influential shoe-black dealers," to do this, they lacked the bump of Christianity. 2 In order to modify the human organism, so that it may ac- quire skill and handiness in a given branch of industry, and become labour-power of a special kind, a special education or training is requisite, and this, on its part, costs an equivalent in commodities of a greater or less amount. 37.) 8 One example. Necessity itself compels him to apportion his time accurately between his different kinds of work. Neither the nature, nor the value of this material is of any importance. Under the ideal measure of values there lurks the hard cash. The great majority of the labourers now "unproductive" would have to be turned into "productive" ones. To devise and administer a successful code of factory discipline, suited to the necessities of factory diligence, was the Herculean enterprise, the noble achievement of Arkwright! Even at the present day, when the system is perfectly organised and its labour lightened to the utmost, it is found nearly impossible to convert persons past the age of puberty, into useful factory hands." 1 The factory code in which capital formulates, like a private legislator, and at his own good will, his autocracy over his workpeople, unaccompanied by that division of responsi- bility, in other matters so much approved of by the bourgeoisie, and unaccompanied by the still more approved representative system, this code is but the capitalistic caricature of that social regulation of the labour-process which becomes requisite in co-operation on a great scale, and in the employment in com- mon, of instruments of labour and especially of machinery. c. Given the rate at which machinery transfers its value to the product, the amount of value so transferred depends on the total value of the machinery. per week, during the latter part of 1862." 2 Even when working short time the rent was frequently deducted from the wages of the operatives. Later on, we saw also that labour, too, possesses the same two-fold nature; for, so far as it finds expression in value, it does not possess the same characteristics that belong to it as a creator of use-values. CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO CAPITAL 607 power of labour takes the appearance of an intrinsic property of capital, in which it is incorporated, just as the productive forces of social labour take the appearance of inherent properties of capital, and as the constant appropriation of surplus-labour by the capitalists, takes that of a constant self-expansion of capital. of Insp. Free labourers, in the double sense that neither they themselves form part and parcel of the means of production, as in the case of slaves, bondsmen, &c, nor do the means of pro- duction belong to them, as in the case of peasant-proprietors; they are, therefore, free from, unencumbered by, any means of production of their own. To sum up, the world is full of great, excellent, and daily service and benefit." (Martin Luther: "An die Pfarrherrn wider den Wucher zu predigen," Wittenberg, 1540.) 2 In "Zur Kritik der Pol. 2 Public Health, 3rd report, etc., pp. 246 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION Mr. Charles Parsons, late house surgeon of the same institu- tion, writes in a letter to Commissioner Longe, amongst other things: "I can only speak from personal observation and not from statistical data, but I do not hesitate to assert that my indigna- tion has been aroused again and again at the sight of poor children whose health has been sacrificed to gratify the avarice of either parents or employers." He enumerates the causes of the diseases of the potters, and sums them up in the phrase, "long hours." The report of the Commission trusts that "a manu- facture which has assumed so prominent a place in the whole world, will not long be subject to the remark that its great success is accompanied with the physical deterioration, wide- spread bodily suffering, and early death of the workpeople . The superficiality of Political Economy shows itself in the fact that it looks upon the expansion and contraction of cred- it, which is a mere symptom of the periodic changes of the indus- trial cycle, as their cause. 742 CHAPTER XXIX GENESIS OP THE CAPITALIST FARMER Now that we have considered the forcible creation of a class of outlawed proletarians, the bloody discipline that turned them into wage-labourers, the disgraceful action of the State which employed the police to accelerate the accumulation of capital by increasing the degree of exploitation of labour, the question remains: whence came the capitalists originally? is a pledge." (John Bellers: "Essays about the Poor, Manu- factures, Trade, Plantations, and Immorality," Lond., 1699, p. Hist.," lib. pp. 1 The property of the capitalist in the product of the labour of others "is a strict consequence of the law of appropriation, the fundamental prin- ciple of which was, on the contrary, the exclusive title of every labourer to the product of his own labour." (Cherbuliez, "Richesse ou Pauvrete," Paris, 1841, p 58, where, however, the dialectical reversal is not properly developed.) * The following passage (to p. 30, sqq. S., Gentleman. COMMODITIES 53 the value in use, B, into the substance in which to express its, A's, own value. But from this we see how capital, for the purposes of its self-expansion, has usurped the labour necessary in the home of the family. "Wages," says John Stuart Mill, "have no productive power; they are the price of a productive power. 38, 39.) COMMODITIES 77 aimed at. Hence, the historical movement which changes the producers into wage-workers, appears, on the one hand, as their emancipation from serfdom and from the fetters of the guilds, and this side alone exists for our bourgeois historians. Part of the land was cul- tivated in severalty as freehold by the members of the community, another part — ager publicus — was cultivated by them in com- mon. 3) Workshops, defined approximately as in the former Act; as for the children, young workers and women employed there, the workshops are about on a par with the non-textile factories, but again conditions are easier in details. If, therefore, two different commodities, such as gold and silver, are simultaneously measures of value, all commodities have two prices — one a gold-price, the other a silver-price. There is in reality nothing very strange in this result. It amounts to twelve shillings or the value of two days' work. g., in the branches of industry already mentioned, which are of an exceedingly fatigu- ing nature; the official working-day means for each worker usually 12 hours by night or day. 321. 169. B. B. x Encourage or allow (!) the work- ing-power to emigrate, and what of the capitalist?... The directing motive, the end and aim of capitalist produc- tion, is to extract the greatest possible amount of surplus-value, 1 and consequently to exploit labour-power to the greatest possible extent. s. Mr. Peel had the foresight to bring with him, besides, 3,000 persons of the working-class, men, women, and children. And a given quantity of any commodity contains a definite quantity of human labour. 100 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION of money carried on for centuries by kings and princes to such an extent that, of the original weights of the coins, nothing in fact remained but the names. Every master may put an iron ring round the neck, arms or legs of his slave, by which to know him more easily and to be more certain of him. "During the working part of the week six hours is the utmost unbroken period ever attained at any one time for rest, and out of this has to come the time spent in coming and going to and from work, washing, dressing, and meals, leav- ing a very short period indeed for rest, and none for fresh air and play, unless at the expense of the sleep necessary for young boys, especially at such hot and fatiguing work... In addition, it falls a prey to the destructive influence of natural forces. c, p. 300) which English legislation called into life by means of the mutually conflicting Fac- tory Acts, the Factory Acts Extension Act and the Workshops' Act, finally became intolerable, and thus all legislative enactments on this subject were codified in the Factory and Workshop Act of 1878. daily. In order, therefore, to find an analogy, we must have recourse to the mist-enveloped regions of the religious world. I have not been in bed since the night before last. "Either," says Dr. Hunter, "the whole proceeding will of necessity stop as an ab- surdity, or the public compassion (!) be effectually aroused to the obligation which may now be without exaggeration called na- tional, of supplying cover to those who by reason of their having no capital, cannot provide it for themselves, though they can by periodical payments reward those who will provide it for them." 3 Admire this capitalistic justice! The owner of land, of houses, the businessman, when expropriated by "improvements" such as railroads, the building of new streets, &c, not only receives full indemnity. Only now can one fully understand the effrontery of these apologists. c, p. l The net result is, that all owners of commodities sell their goods to one another at 10% above their value, which comes precisely to the same as if they sold them at their true value. 2 Here I merely cast a hurried glance over the conditions of their dwellings. So long as the seller sticks fast to his money, which is the transformed shape of his commodity, that commodity is still in the first phase of its metamorphosis, and has completed only half its course. * Turn and twist then as we may, the fact remains unaltered. Here everything remains about as it was: children more than 10 years of age may work 5*/ 2 hours a day; or 6 hours and Saturday off; young persons and women, 10 hours on 5 days, and at most 6^2 on Saturday. 1774, in which work there is a special chapter entitled "Prices depend on quantity of money," at p. As capitalist, he is only capital person- ified. Direct force, outside economic conditions, is of course still used, but only exceptional- ly. From this point of view, exchange is for him a social transaction of a general character. It is not a case of two independent forces working on one another. En tout genre de travail il doit arriver, et il arrive en effet, que le salaire de l'ouvrier se borne a ce qui lui est necessaire pour lui procurer sa subsistance." (Turgot, "Reflexions, &c," CEuvres, ed. This external relation between the finished product, and its various and diverse elements makes it, as well in this case as in the case of all similar finished articles, a matter of chance whether the detail labourers are brought together in one workshop or not. 1767,' p. This was necessary to keep the naked feet of the young children from get- ting frost bitten, for it was a bitterly cold day. In the same way, the 2-^ lbs. — Or, on the other hand, accumulation slackens in consequence of the rise in the price of labour, because the stimulus of gain is blunted. The number of the labourers and the con- centration of their efforts sufficed. From what has been said, it is manifest, that, in a free nation, where slaves are not allowed of, the surest wealth consists in a multitude of laborious poor; for besides, that they are the never-failing nursery of fleets and armies, without them there could be no enjoyment, and no product of any country could be valuable."To make the society" [which of course consists of non-workers] "happy and people easier under the meanest circumstances, it is requisite that great numbers of them should be ignorant as well as poor; knowledge both enlarges and multiplies our desires, and the fewer things a man wishes for, the more easily his necessities may be supplied." 1 What Mande- ville, an honest, clear-headed man, had not yet seen, is that the mechanism of the process of accumulation itself increases, along with the capital, the mass of "labouring poor," i.e., the wage- labourers, who turn their labour-power into an increasing power of self-expansion of the growing capital, and even by doing so must eternise their dependent relation on their own product, as personified in the capitalists. In every respect better off than his Continental companion in misery. Lastly, he puts down £1,200 for depreciation of machinery, because "the weather and the natural principle of decay do not suspend their operations because the steam-engine ceases to revolve." He says, emphati- cally, he does not estimate his depreciation at more than the small sum of £1,200, because his machinery is already nearly worn out. . 31.) 572 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION necessaries in order to maintain his labour-power, just as coal and water are supplied to the steam-engine and oil to the wheel. It increases and diminishes because the sum of the prices increases or diminishes in consequence of the change of price. The consequences of this are various. 490 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION outside the domestic sphere, to women, to young persons, and to children of both sexes, creates a new economic foundation for a higher form of the family and of the relations between the sexes. Momen- tarily, indeed, the value originally advanced, the £100 is distin- guishable from the surplus-value of £10 that is annexed to it during circulation; but the distinction vanishes immediately. 2 Officials of a government which is main- 1 According to a table in Murphy's "Ireland Industrial, Political and Social," 1870, 94.6 per cent, of the holdings do not reach 100 acres, 5.4 exceed 100 acres. 1,307,293 lbs. 131. EXPORT OF WOOL FROM INDIA TO GREAT BRITAIN. 515, 517, THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 667 of the miners. Consequently, a part of the annual surplus- labour must have been applied to the production of additional means of production and subsistence, over and above the quantity of these things required to replace the capital advanced. On the other hand, the advantages of further division are obtainable only by adding to the number of workmen, and this can be done only by adding multiples of the va- rious detail groups. For example: if in consequence of the increased productiveness of labour, the value of labour-power fall from 4 shillings to 3, or the necessary labour-time from 8 hours to 6, the price of labour-power may possibly not fall below 3s. The total value of these la- 1 In the progress of culture "all, and perhaps more than all, the capital and labour which once loosely occupied 500 acres, are now concentrated for the more complete tillage of 100." Although "relatively to the amount of capital and labour employed, space is concentrated, it is an enlarged sphere of production, as compared to the sphere of production formerly occupied or worked upon by one single independent agent of production." (R. 59.) The author of this epoch making anonymous work is J. 1855," p. a strong man." (ns. In this manner the labour realised in the values of commodities is presented not only under its negative aspect, under which abstraction is made from every concrete form and useful property of actual work, but its own positive nature is made to reveal itself expressly. A - B — G. He simply reproduced in his dull way what Helvetius and other Frenchmen had said with esprit in the 18th century. For the so- lution of this apparent contradiction, many intermediate terms are as yet wanted, as from the standpoint of elementary algebra many intermediate terms are wanted to understand that -y may represent an actual magnitude. * In England this system is characteristically called the "Sweating system." On the other hand piece-wage allows the capitalist to make a contract for so much per piece with the head labourer — in manufactures with the chief of some group, in mines with the extractor of the coal, in the fac- tory with the actual machine-worker — at a price for which the head labourer himself undertakes the enlisting and payment of his assist- ant workpeople. The tool, as we have seen, is not extermi- nated by the machine. When they assume this money-shape, com- modities strip off every trace of their natural use-value, and of the particular kind of labour to which they owe their creation, in order to transform themselves into the uniform, socially recog- nised incarnation of homogeneous human labour. The technical and social conditions of the process, and consequently the very mode of production must be revolutionised, before the productiveness of labour can be increased. And yet, whether the merchant who has paid £100 for his cotton sells it for £110, or lets it go for £100, or even £50, his money has, at all events, gone through a characteristic and original movement, quite different in kind from that which it goes through in the hands of the peas- ant who sells corn, and with the money thus set free buys clothes. m. Mr. R. In the case of 258 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION during the 24 hours, offers very welcome opportunities of exceeding the limits of the normal working-day, e. The "societies Monopolia" of Luther were power- ful levers for concentration of capital. But though the Factory Acts thus artificially ripen the material elements necessary for the con- version of the manufacturing system into the factory system, yet at the same time, owing to the necessity they impose for greater outlay of capital, they hasten on the decline of the small masters, and the concentration of capital. When the working-day is prolonged, the price of labour- power may fall below its value, although that price be nominally unchanged or even rise. II., p. 11.) 2 That Philistine paper, the Spectator, states that after the introduc- tion of a sort of partnership between capitalist and workmen in the "Wire- work Company of Manchester," "the first result was a sudden decrease in waste, the men not seeing why they should waste their own property any more than any other master's, and waste is, perhaps, next to bad debts, the greatest source of manufacturing loss." The same paper finds that the main defect in the Rochdale co-operative experiments is this: "They showed that associa- tions of workmen could manage shops, mills, and almost all forms of indus- try with success, and they immediately improved the condition of the men but then they did not leave a clear place for masters." Quelle horreur! 332 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION capitalist is in substance two-fold by reason of the two-fold nature of the process of production itself,— which, on the one hand, is a social process for producing use-values, on the other, a process for creating surplus-value — in form that control is despotic. Smith, L.L.D. On the Life, Death, and Phi- losophy of his Friend, David Hume. So, too, the money appears in the first phase as a solid crystal of 1 "II y a done quatre termes et trois contractants, dont i'un inter- view deux t'ois." (Le Trosne, 1. c, p 142. As on the stage, the same per- sons had to appear in turns in the different scenes of the differ- ent acts. 3 In manufacture, in order to make the collective labourer, and through him capital, rich in social productive power, each labourer must be made poor in individual productive powers. . What, on the other 208 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION It is otherwise with the subjective factor of the labour-proc- ess, with labour-power in action. Suddenly, however, Say recollects that "with a greater quan- tity" of stockings their "price" (which of course has nothing to do with their exchange-value!) falls "parce que la concurrence les (les producteurs) ob- lige a donner les produits pour ce qu'ils leur coutent." But whence does the profit come, if the capitalist sells the commodities at cost-price? On the other hand, division of labour, which is the distinguishing principle of manu- facture, requires the isolation of the various stages of production and their independence of each other. From this same memorial we learn also that the delicate gour- mands among the aristocratic hypocrites of Exeter Hall, especially encourage this "Sunday labour." These "holy ones," so zealous in cute curanda, show their Christianity by the humility with which they bear the over-work, the privations, and the hunger of others. Say and F. Every combination of employed and unemployed disturbs the "harmonious" action of this law. Is the great manufacturing interest of this country to be treated as a secondary matter in order to save some little trouble to Inspectors and Sub-Inspectors of Factories?" 4 All these shifts naturally were of no avail. of Insp. 2 "Sixth and last Report of the Children's Employment Commission,'* published at the end of March, 1867. c, p. In all cases, therefore, the use-value of the labour-power is advanced to the capitalist: the labourer allows the buyer to consume it before he receives payment of the price; he everywhere gives credit to the capitalist. MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OP COMMODITIES 121 Just as the currency of money, generally considered, is but a reflex of the circulation of commodities, or of the antithetical metamorphoses they undergo, so, too, the velocity of that cur- rency reflects the rapidity with which commodities change their forms, the continued interlacing of one series of metamorphoses with another, the hurried social interchange of matter, the rapid disappearance of commodities from the sphere of circulation, and the equally rapid substitution of fresh ones in their places. Polit." Paris Ed., t. There- upon began the consignment of goods to India and China, thus naturally making the glut more intense. c. Though the same quantity of labour adds always to its products only the same sum of new value, still the old capital-value, transmitted by the labour to the products, increases with the growing pro^ ductivity of labour. The labour-time respectively necessary for the production of the linen and the coat, and therefore the value of these com- modities may simultaneously vary in the same direction, but at unequal rates, or in opposite directions, or in other ways. It differentiates itself as original value from itself as surplus-value; as the father differentiates himself from himself qua the son, yet both are one and of one age: for only by the surplus- value of £10 does the £100 originally advanced become capita i, and so soon as this takes place, so soon as the son, and by the son, the father, is begotten, so soon does their difference vanish, and they again become one, £110. 3 From the standpoint of these, capitalistic co-operation does not man- ifest itself as a particular historical form of co-operation, but co- operation itself appears to be a historical form peculiar to, and spe- cifically distinguishing, the capitalist process of production. Then the collective working-day of 12 men simultaneously employed, consists of 144 hours; and although the labour of each of the dozen men may deviate more or less from av- erage social labour, each of them requiring a different time for the same operation, yet since the working-day of each is one-twelfth of the collective working-day of 144 hours, it possesses the quali- ties of an average social working-day. But in the great majority of cases, instruments of labour show even to the most superficial observer, traces of the labour of past ages. 3.) 3 The following shows how such times are exploited by the "amis du commerce." "On one occasion (1839) an old grasping banker (in the city) MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OF COMMODITIES 139 If we now consider the sum total of the money current dur- ing a given period, we shall find that, given the rapidity of cur- rency of the circulating medium and of the means of payment, it is equal to the sum of the prices to be realised, plus the sum of the payments falling due, minus the payments that balance each other, minus finally the number of circuits in which the same piece of coin serves in turn as means of circulation and of payment. " (1. They are generally men who have no knowl- edge, and can scarcely understand the witnesses who are called before them, and the terms which are used and such like." "Would you have the jury composed of persons who had been employed in mining?" "Yes, partly .... With such rubbish has the brave fellow, with his motto, "nulla dies sine linea," piled up mountains of books. In many cases a quarter of the body is torn from the trunk, and either involves death, or a future of wretched inca- pacity and suffering. 292 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION abolished." 1 A crowd of masters, who until then had been afraid of using the relay system for young persons and women, now took it up heart and soul. . But the increased size of the gearing was too much for the water-power, which had now become insufficient, and this was one of the circumstances that led to a more accurate investigation of the laws of friction. . 21 • Reports, &c, for 31st October, 1848, p 95. Either the entire machine is only a more or less altered mechanical edition of the old handicraft tool, as, for instance, the power-loom, 1 or the working parts fitted in the frame of the machine are old acquaintances, as spindles are in a mule, needles in a stocking-loom, saws in a sawing-machine, and knives in a chopping machine. Be- fore I turn to his present situation, a rapid retrospect. It is one of the great merits of the Physio- crats, that in their Tableau economique they were the first to at- tempt to depict the annual production in the shape in which it is presented to us after passing through the process of circulation. of Insp. c, t. It is a strange proof of the general neglect of the morals and health 1 1. As soon as one has made a privy, it is made use of by the whole neighbourhood. Surplus-labour and necessary labour glide one into the other. In most of the Prussian provinces, Frederick II. 3 Before Eli Whitney invented the cotton gin in 1793, the separation of the seed from a pound of cotton cost an average day's labour. It deals solely with the agricultural gang-system. c, p. Another, at 9 years old, sometimes made three 12-hour shifts running, and, when 10, has made two days and two nights running." A third, "now 10 . c, p. THE GENERAL LAW OP CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 659 Hunter, "on two points; first, that there are about 20 large colo- nies in London, of about 10,000 persons each, whose miserable condition exceeds almost anything he has seen elsewhere in Eng- land, and is almost entirely the result of their bad house accommo- dation; and second,, that the crowded and dilapidated condition of the houses of these colonies is much worse than was the case 20 years ago." 1 "It is not too much to say that life in parts of London and Newcastle is infernal." 2 Further, the better-off part of the working-class, together with the small shopkeepers and other elements of the lower middle class, falls in London more and more under the curse of these vile conditions of dwelling, in proportion as "improvements," and with them the demolition of old streets and houses, advance, as factories and the afflux of human beings grow in the metropo- lis, and finally as house rents rise with the ground-rents "Rents have become so heavy that few labouring men can afford more than one room." 3 There is almost no house-property in London that is not overburdened with a number of middlemen. ' "'Though I signed it [the petition], I said at the time I was putting my hand to a wrong thing.' 'Then why did you put your hand to it?' 'Because I should have been turned off if I had refused.' Whence it would appear that this petitioner felt himself 'oppressed,' but not exactly by the Factory Act." I. See "Report from Geneva on the Watch Trade" in "Reports by H. COMMODITIES 45 and linen, are combinations of special productive activities with cloth and yarn, while the values, coat and linen, are, on the other hand, mere homogeneous congelations of undifferentiated labour, so the labour embodied in these latter values does not count by virtue of its productive relation to cloth and yarn, but only as being expenditure of human labour-power. l To be consistent therefore, the upholders of the delusion that surplus-value has its origin in a nominal rise of prices or in the privilege which the seller has of selling too dear, must assume the existence of a class that only buys and does not sell, i.e., only consumes and does not produce. If we are acquainted with nothing but the abstract categories of circulation, which are common to all these modes of production, we cannot possibly know anything of the specific points of difference of those modes, nor pronounce any judgment upon them. lOd. or 2s. The Yankees have given to articles thus fitted together, the name of "assembled articles," a name they deserve, for being an assemblage of taxes. The relative value of money will, therefore, be less in the nation with more developed capitalist mode of production than in the nation with less developed. On the special "proletariat foncier," to which this system of parcelling out the land has given rise, see among others, the work of Col- ins, already quoted, and Karl Marx "Der Achtzehnte Brumaire des Louis Bonaparte." 2nd edition. If the labourer wants all his time to produce the necessary means of subsistence for himself and his race, he has no time left in which to work gratis for others. and II. But just as little as better clothing, food, and treatment, and a larger peculium, do away with the exploitation of the slave, so little do they set aside that of the wage-worker. He has made the important discovery that if, on the one hand, the formation of surplus-value, or surplus-produce, and the consequent accumulation of cap- ital, is now-a-days due to the thrift of the capitalist, on the other hand, in the lowest stages of civilisation it is the strong who compel the weak to econ- omise. The reason is simply this, that the poor Irish farmer is incomparably more humane than the rich English. No friend to Ireland can wish the war to be prolonged [between the landlords and the small Celtic farmers] — still less, that it should end by the victory of the tenants. But could the labourer 1 "Mr. Ricardo, ingeniously enough, avoids a difficulty which, on a first view, threatens to encumber his doctrine, that value depends on the quantity of labour employed in production. Hence nowhere do we find a more shameful squander- ing of human labour-power for the most despicable purposes than in England, the land of machinery. In the comparison of the wages in different nations, we must therefore take into account all the factors that determine changes in the amount of the value of labour-power; the price and the extent of the prime necessaries of life as naturally and historically developed, the cost of training the labourers, the part played by the labour of women and children, the productiveness of labour, its extensive and intensive magnitude. THE WORKING-DAY 245 do not get any more for working at night. (Repts., &c, for April 30th, 1863, p. . Princ d'Econ. (This same Peto, after 1867, came to an end a la Strousberg.) THE WORKING-DAY 235 tains his rights as a purchaser when he tries to make the work- ing-day as long as possible, and to make, whenever possible, two working-days out of one. We suppose him to have spent on his product only that amount of labour-time that is on an average socially necessa- ry. "Cours d'Econ. . But the former sphere alone in- terests us at present. Ill, p. Of course, we do not forget that this new value only replaces the money advanced by the capitalist in the purchase of the labour-power, and spent by the labourer on the necessaries of life. of Fact, for 31st. Seventh Report," 1865, p. even to work for their own daily bread. Suppose, that with the prevailing productiveness of labour, 12 articles are produced in these 12 hours. If the production of the average daily means of sub- sistence of the labourer takes up 6 hours, he must work, on the average, 6 hours every day, to produce his daily labour-power, or to reproduce the value received as the result of its sale. 21.) This workshop, the product of the division of labour in manufac- ture, produced in its turn — machines. It is well known what part the despoil- ing of the Delphic Temple, by the Phocians, played in the history of Greece. Newman Hall: "He excommunicated the slave-owners, but prays with the fine folk who. Tt lasted in the factories 14, 15, or more hours. 8 Peasant agriculture on a small scale, and the carrying on of independ- ent handicrafts, which together form the basis of the feudal mode of produc- tion, and after the dissolution of that system, continue side by side with the capitalist mode, also form the economic foundation k of the classical com- munities at their best, after the primitive form of ownership of land in com- mon had disappeared, and before slavery had seized on production in earnest. Thus he saves himself from all further puzzling of the brain, and what is more, implicitly de- clares his opponent to be stupid enough to contend against, not the capitalistic employment of machinery, but machinery itself. The town was, therefore, in 1865, more full than ever. But it is quite otherwise with regard to the additional capi- tal of £2,000. Parry, 1. The whole form of the movement of modern industry depends, therefore, upon the constant transformation of a part of the labouring population into unemployed or half-employed hands. Does an operative in a cotton-factory produce nothing but cotton goods? 6d., and notwithstand- ing this, many of them said they would rather work 10 hours." 1. but are left at liberty without interruption to pursue those callings which are suited to their various dispositions. Workman says: No, he has already been punished for the breach. c, p. "A king of England might EXPROPRIATION OF AGRICULTURAL POPULATION 729 as well claim to drive his subjects into the sea," says Professor Newman. In order to calculate and compare the areas of rectilinear figures, we decompose them into triangles. . of coffee only one-fourth as much sub- stance of value — labour — as is contained in 1 lb. c, pp. At the beginning of 1867 the manufacturers resorted to their usual way out of the difficulty, viz., reducing wages 5 per cent. Now the quantity of gold which the circulation can absorb, constantly fluctuates about a given level. c. This crisis was also utilised to teach sewing to the daughters of the workmen in sewing schools. Where, for instance, the physique of the working-class has deteriorated, and is, relatively speaking, exhausted, which is the case in all countries with a well developed capitalist production, the lower forms of labour, which demand great expenditure of muscle, are in general considered as skilled, compared with much more delicate forms of labour; the latter sink down to the level of unskilled labour. 1 Dr. Julian Hunter, in his epoch-making report on the dwellings of the agricultural labourers, says: "The cost of the hind" (a name for the agricultural labourer, inherited from the time of serfdom) "is fixed at the lowest possible amount on which he can live .... "Do you think that further experiments ought to be made in order to ascertain whether a dietary might not be hit upon for prisoners employed on public works nearly approaching to the dietary of free labourers?'' 3 . 10. The fact that the labourer consumes his means of subsistence for his own purposes, and not to please the capitalist, has no bearing on the matter. I shall give an account of a recent campaign by the English manufacturers against the Clauses in the Factory Acts that protect the "hands" against dangerous machinery. Coin and symbols of value That money takes the shape of coin, springs from its function as the circulating medium. 2 Besides, capital with its accompanying relations springs up from an economic soil that is the product of a long process of development. Yet, for all that, the table continues to be that common, every-day thing, wood. 61, sq. But a particular com- modity cannot become the universal equivalent except by a social act. 2 In England and Wales, in 1861, there were employed in making ma- chinery, 60,807 persons, including the masters and their clerks, &c, also all agents and business people connected with this industry, but excluding the makers of small machines, such as sewing-machines, &.C., as also the makers of the operative parts of machines, such as spindles. 6 by 4 ft. 1 Although the Physiocrats could not penetrate the mystery of sur- plus-value, yet this much was clear to them, viz., that it is "une richesse independante et disponible qu'il (the possessor) n'a point achetee et qu'il vend." (Turgot: "Reflexions sur la Formation et la Distribution des Richesses," p. Smith. In the simple circulation of commodities, the two extremes of the circuit have the same economic form. 1859.-961,707,264 lbs. That quantity is conditioned by two circumstances: first the relations between debtors and creditors form a sort of chain, in such a way that A, when he receives money from his debtor B, straightway hands it over to G his creditor, and so on; the second circumstance is the length of the intervals between the different due-days of the obligations. Compared with the beds, the house does represent something equal to them, in so far as it represents what is really equal, both in the beds and the house. Before I came here I was nearly a year at the same work at some works in the country. So it is in the world of commodities with the products of men's hands. Bunbury, Bart., on the High Price of Provisions. by A. We begin with the case in which the working-day is short- ened. Hence, the second peculiarity of the equivalent form is, that concrete labour becomes the form under which its opposite, ab- stract human labour, manifests itself. In other words, there is increase in the value and the material mass of the instru- ments of labour, such as buildings, machinery, drain-pipes, work- ing-cattle, apparatus of every kind that function for a longer or shorter time in processes of production constantly repeated, or Or ... If then we treat this mode of production as one eternally fixed by Nature for every state of society, we necessarily overlook that which is the differ- entia specifica of the value-form, and consequently of the commodity-form, and of its further developments, money-form, capital-form, &c. They are nothing more than the materialisation of so many hours or so many days of so- cial labour. For the si Ik- weavers of Macclesfield the average was only Is. 8y d. 1 A great part of them cannot read, and they are, as a rule, utter savages and very extraordinary creatures. If he (i.e., his "hands") worked 12 hours before, and is limited to 10, then every 12 machines or spindles in his establishment shrink to 10, and should the works be disposed of, they will be valued only as 10, so that a sixth part would thus be deducted from the value of every factory in the country." 2 To this West of Scotland bourgeois brain, inheriting the accumulated capitalistic qualities of "four generations," the value of the means of production, spindles, &c, is so inseparably mixed up with their property, as capital, to expand their own value, and to swallow up daily a definite quantity of the unpaid labour of oth- ers, that the head of the firm of Carlile & Co. actually imagines that if he sells his factory, not only will the value of the spindles be paid to him, but, in addition, their power of annexing surplus- value, not only the labour which is embodied in them, and is nec- essary to the production of spindles of this kind, but also the sur- plus-labour which they help to pump out daily from the brave Scots of Paisley, and for that very reason he thinks that with the shortening of the working-day by 2 hours, the selling-price of 12 spinning machines dwindles to that of 10! 1 Reports of Tnsp. To exchange £100 for cotton, and then this same cotton again for £100, is merely a roundabout way of exchanging money for money, the same for the same, and 150 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION appears to be an operation just as purposeless as it is absurd. Defects of the Total or Expanded form of value In the first place, the relative expression of value is incomplete because the series representing it is interminable. Let us return to the circulation of commodities. When gold replaced silver as a measure of value, the same name was applied according to the ratio be- tween the values of silver and gold, to perhaps l-15th of a pound of gold. At the end of 1866 and the beginning of 1867, one of the Irish land magnates, Lord Dufferin, set about its solution in The Times. 47. 2 In the United States the restoration, in this way, of handicrafts based on machinery is frequent; and therefore, when the inevitable transition to the factory system shall take place, the ensuing concentration will, compared with Europe and even with England, stride on in seven-league boots. This two and a half days' labour is also represented by a piece of gold of the value of fifteen shil- lings. Three of our children attend school, for whom we pay Id. a week a head. of Fact., 31st October, 1865," pp. Hence Aristotle: "since chrematistic is a double science, one part belonging to commerce, the other to economic, the latter being necessary and praiseworthy, the former based on circulation and with justice disapproved (for it is not based on Nature, but on mutual cheating), therefore the usurer is most rightly hated, because money itself is the source of his gain, and is not used for the purposes for which it was invented. The number of these workwomen in the United Kingdom in 1861, was 750,334. If the poets were true, there is no man so hearty, so merry, as the blacksmith; he rises early and strikes his sparks before the sun; he eats and drinks and sleeps as no other man. "The hind with his 10s. We may form an idea of the stupendous nature ol the cotton trade in that district when we con- sider that, of the gross number of textile factories in the United King- dom, it absorbs 45.2 per cent., of the spindles 83.3 percent., of the power- looms 81.4 per cent., of the mechanical horse-power 72.6 per cent., and of the total number of persons employed 58.2 per cent. It either generates its own motive power, like the steam-engine, the caloric engine, the elec- tromagnetic machine, &c, or it receives its impulse from some al- ready existing natural force, like the water-wheel from a head of water, the wind-mill from wind, &c. Again, although the la- bour of a fustian cutter demands great bodily exertion, and is at the same time unhealthy, yet it counts only as unskilled labour. Doctor: It is all noblemen, gentlemen, and all other that live either by a stinted rent or stypend, or do not manure [cultivation] the ground, or doe occupy no buying and selling." 744 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION Thus they grew rich at the expense both of their labourers and their landlords. And again and again it has been pointed out that, notwithstanding the many salubri- ous influences which there are in country life, the crowding which so favours the extension of contagious disease, also favours the origination of disease which is not contagious. The absolute reduction in the demand for labour which neces- sarily follows from this is obviously so much the greater, the higher the degree in which the capitals undergoing this process of renewal are already massed together by virtue of the central- isation movement. Opdyke: "A Treatise on Polit. The fact that it is value, is made mani- fest by its equality with the coat, just as the sheep's nature of a Christian is shown in his resemblance to the Lamb of God. The annual production must in the first place furnish all those objects (use-values) from which the material components of cap- ital, used up in the course of the year, have to be replaced. 130-131.) 358 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION in some communities replaces the silversmith, in others the school- master. The variable capital, instead of being one half, is only one quarter, of the total capital. E.] 2 "Census, &c," 1. On the whole, the labourer and his means of production remained closely united, like the snail with its shell, and thus there was wanting the principal basis of manufacture, the separation of the labourer from his means of production, and the conversion of these means into capital. These profits not only form a source of accelerated accumulation, but also attract into the favoured sphere of production a large part of the additional social capital that is being constantly created, and is ever on the look-out for new investments. II, L. We sum them up once again, but only in so far as they afford new points of view in regard to accumulation. Hence the notion of a productive labourer implies not merely a relation between work and useful effect, between labourer and product of labour, but also a specific, social relation of production, a relation that has sprung up historically and stamps the labourer as the direct means of creating surplus-value. Every advance in Chemistry not only multiplies the number of useful materials and the useful applications of those already known, thus extending with the growth of capital its sphere of investment. Capital eschews no profit, or very small profit, just as Nature was formerly said to abhor a vacuum. On that account, Sir James Steuart, in order to distinguish them from their purely local substitutes, calls gold and silver "money of the world." is reflected in their equally false conception of the international movement of the precious metals (1. This contradiction comes to light, as soon as by the general employment of machinery in a given industry, the value of the machine-produced commodity regulates the value of all commodities of the same sort; and it is this contradiction, that in its turn, drives the capitalist, without his being conscious of the fact, l to excessive lengthening of the working-day, in order that he may compensate the decrease in the relative number of labourers exploited, by an increase not only of the relative, but of the absolute surplus-labour. Why? Hence the riddle presented by money is but the riddle presented by commodities; only it now strikes us in its most glaring form. The necessity for a value-form grows with the increasing number and variety of the commodities ex- changed. 3 Gladstone in the House of Commons, Feb 13th, 1843. If the tongue is thus used in the North as the organ of appropriation, no wonder that, in the South, the stomach serves as the organ of accumulated property, and that a Kaffir estimates the wealth of a man by the size of his belly. Rep.," p. 8.) The author of the "Essay on Trade and Commerce" grasps the effect of a relative surplus-population on the employed labourers with his usual unerring bourgeois instinct. 2 SECTION 5.— THE STRIFE BETWEEN WORKMAN AND MACHINE The contest between the capitalist and the wage-labourer dates back to the very origin of capital. I have been in a position to reduce those 33 to 13."? Hence in antiquity over-work becomes horrible only when the object is to obtain exchange-value in its specific independent money-form; in the production of gold and silver. The sum of £1,500 that formerly represent- ed the wages of the discharged carpet-makers, now represents in the shape of machinery: (1) the value of the means of production used in the construction of that machinery, (2) the wages of the me- chanics employed in its construction, and (3) the surplus-value falling to the share of their "master." Further, the machinery need not be renewed till it is worn out. to 8 p. II. . The intermediate steps of the process vanish in the result and leave no trace behind. 2. The fact that the currency of coins itself effects a separation between their nominal and their real weight, creating a distinc- tion between them as mere pieces of metal on the one hand, and as coins with a definite function on the other — this fact implies the latent possibility of replacing metallic coins by tokens of some other material, by symbols serving the same purposes as coins. . 2 ) we call "surplus-produce." Just as the rate of surplus- value is determined by its relation, not to the sum total of the capital, but to its variable part; in like manner, the relative quan- tity of surplus-produce is determined by the ratio that this prod- uce bears, not to the remaining part of the total product, but to that part of it in which is incorporated the necessary labour. — 4,570,581 lbs. c, p. This our friend Robinson soon learns by experience, and having rescued a watch, ledger, and pen and ink from the wreck, commences, like a true-born Briton, to keep a set of books. 66.) r , 2 Si Ton est force de donner pour 18 livres une quantite de telle produc- tion qui en valait 24, lorsqu'on employera ce meme argent a acheter, on aura egalement pour 18 1. Thus, a weaving factory is constituted of a number of power-looms, working side by side, and a sewing factory of a number of sewing-machines all in the same building. The trick is how to kill two birds with one stone. 16. All the linen in the market counts but as one article of commerce, of which each piece is only an aliquot part. per. exchange for the same amount as present labour. at least . . Awaye thei trudge, 1 say, owte of their knowen accustomed houses, fyndynge no place to reste in. I., ch. Such people may get the notion into their heads, that our spinner, for example 224 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION produces or replaces in the first 8 hours of his working-day the value of the cotton; in the following hour and 36 minutes the value of the instruments of labour worn away; in the next hour and 12 min- utes the value of the wages; and that he devotes to the production of surplus-value for the manufacturer, only that well known "last hour." In this way the poor spinner is made to perform the two-fold miracle not only of producing cotton, spindles, steam-engine, coal, oil, &c, at the same time that he spins with them, but also of turning one working-day into five; for, in the example we are considering, the production of the raw material and in- struments of labour demands four working-days of twelve hours each, and their conversion into yarn requires another such day. 96 wherein the "happiness" of the English agricultural labourer already in 1770 consisted. His summary, too, of the history of agri- culture, although not free from gross errors, contains flashes of light. Since past labour always disguises itself as capital, i.e., since the passive of the labour of A, B, C, etc., takes the form of the active of the non-labourer X, bourgeois and political economists are full of praises of the services of dead and gone labour, which, according to the Scotch genius MacCulloch, ought to receive a special remuneration in the shape of interest, profit, etc. In that town a MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 425 We shall here merely allude to the material conditions under which factory labour is carried on. From a concrete point of view, accumulation resolves itself into the reproduction of capital on a progressively increasing scale. On the other hand, it can satisfy the manifold wants of the individual producer himself, only in so far as the mutual exchangeability of all kinds of useful private labour is an established social fact, and therefore the private useful labour of each producer ranks on an equality with that of all others. But if a surplus labouring population is a necessary product of accumulation or of the development of wealth on a capitalist basis, this surplus-population becomes, conversely, the lever of capitalistic accumulation, nay, a condition of existence of the capitalist mode of production. In one piece half an hour's labour was absorbed. It is well known that this relay system, this alternation of two sets of workers, held full sway in the full-blooded youth- time of the English cotton manufacture, and that at the pres- ent time it still flourishes, among others, in the cotton spinning of the Moscow district. The val- 3 3 ue of this yarn is measured by 5^- working-hours, of which 4^- were, without any assistance from him, previously embodied in the means of production, in the cotton, the machinery, and so on; the remain- ing one hour alone is added by him. In order to measure the mechanical force exert- ed to-day by an engine, an indicator has been invented which shows the pressure of the steam in the cylinder. 656 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION One half, or -p^ of the industrial labour categories investi- gated, had absolutely no beer, 28% no milk. That portion of the public, who, about 12 years ago, were struck by the assurance with which, under the sanction of high authority, it was publicly and most earnestly proclaimed, that the whole net profit of the manufacturer flows from the labour of the last hour, and that, therefore, the reduction of the working-day by one hour, would destroy his net profit, that portion of the public, we say, will hardly believe its own eyes, when it now finds, that the original discovery of the virtues of "the last hour" has since been so far im- proved, as to include morals as well as profit; so that, if the duration of the labour of children, is reduced to a full 10 hours, their morals, together with the net profits of their employers, will vanish, both being dependent on this last, this fatal hour. The history of the cotton famine is too characteristic to dis- pense with dwelling upon it for a moment. D., in "An Enquiry into the Causes of the Present High Price of Provisions," London, 1767; Dr. Price, and especially Postleth- wayt, as well in the supplement to his "Universal Dictionary of Trade and Commerce," as in his "Great Britain's Commercial Interest explained and improved." 2nd Edition, 1755. This manoeuvre also failed. (2.) The individual difference in the wages of different labourers who do the same kind of work. Let us take the process of circulation in a form under which it presents itself as a simple and direct exchange of commodities. Of course it is very true, that if a bird's nest did not last longer than the time it takes in building, birds would have to do with- out nests. * Here (from "which in its first stages" to p. Economy in the use of the means of production has to be con- sidered under two aspects. 1 On the other hand, it is absolutely neces- sary that value, in order that it may be distinguished from the varied bodily forms of commodities, should assume this material and unmeaning, but, at the same time, purely social form. At first, carriage manufacture is a combination of various independent handicrafts. 3 An example: The various mechanical apparatus introduced since the Act of 1844 into woollen mills, for replacing the labour of children. c, pp. then formed a much more impor- tant part of the nation than at present. Even in the last third of the 17th century, 4 / s of the English people were agricultural. This premised, with the rate, the mass is at the same time given of the surplus-value that the individual labourer furnishes to the capitalist in a definite period of time. Say, 1. a day. Let us now consider a little more closely the characteristic peculiarities of piece-wages. Emp. Part II, p. Whoever knows the life history of Arkwright, will never dub this barber-genius "noble." Of all the great inventors of the 18th century, he was incontestably the greatest thiever of other people's inven- tions and the meanest fellow. totally laid waste, embracing within their area some of the most fertile lands of Scotland. The return of money into the hands of the weaver is brought about only by the renewal or repetition of the process of circulation with a fresh commodity, which renewed process ends with the same result as its predecessor did. Dunton is not worse than the rest of Biggleswade Union. If men were willing, at a blow, to turn all the soil from pub- lic into private property, they would destroy certainly the root of the evil, but also — the colonies. Its intro- duction went at once to perfect all machinery, to cheapen it, and to stimulate invention and improvement." 2 One of these machines, used for forging paddle-wheel shafts in Lon- don, is called "Thor." It forges a shaft of 16y 2 tons with as much ease as a blacksmith forges a horse-shoe. This corvee soon developed into a servile relationship existing in point of fact, not in point of law, until Russia, the liberator of the world, made it legal under pretence of abolishing serfdom. . 40, where I state that, in the portion of that work that deals with Capital, this problem will be solved: "How does production, on the basis of exchange-value determined simply by labour-time, lead to the result that the exchange-value of labour is less than the exchange-value of its product?" 540 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION works for himself alone, appears as labour for his master. Thus Russia conquered with one blow the magnates of the Da- nubian provinces, and the applause of liberal cretins throughout Europe. A striking example of the second kind, is the needle-making ma- chine. They hope to pay the rent by the straw-plaiting of the fam- ily. The value of the new product further includes: the equivalent of the value of the labour-power together with a surplus-value. 21, 1860. (2) Farms over 1, not over 5 acres. A commodity, such as iron, corn, or a diamond, is therefore, so far as it is a material thing, a use-value, something useful. It is clear that, if the value created by a day's labour increases from, say, 6 to 8 shillings, then the two parts into which this value is divided, viz., price of labour-power and surplus-value, may both of them increase simultaneously, and either equally or unequally. 2 How the famine and its consequences have been deliberately made the most of, both by the individual landlords and by the Engish legislature, to forcibly carry out the agricultural revolution and to thin the population of Ireland down to the proportion satisfactory to the landlords, I shall show more fully in Vol. m. Let us exam- ine this a little more closely. prove that production could never be enlarged, for it requires as an indispensable con- dition to such an enlargement that food, raw materials, and tools should be previously augmented; which is in fact maintaining that no increase of production can take place without a previous increase, or, in other words, that an increase is impossible." (S. General Rule: The value of the capital advanced divided by the surplus-value annually consumed, gives the number of years, or reproduction periods, at the expira- tion of which the capital originally advanced has been consumed by the capitalist and has disappeared. i., ch. The treas- ures captured outside Europe by undisguised looting, enslave- 1 In the year 1866 more than a million Hindus died of hunger in the province of Orissa alone. The English cotton operative is in every THE WORKING-DAY 269 What experience shows to the capitalist genarally is a con- stant excess of population, i.e., an excess in relation to the momentary requirements of surplus-labour-absorbing capital, although this excess is made up of generations of human beings stunted, short-lived, swiftly replacing each other, plucked, so to say, before maturity. On the other hand, as I have before remarked, the exchange of products springs up at the points where different families, tribes, communities, come in contact; for, in the beginning of civilisation, it is not pri- vate individuals but families, tribes, &c, that meet on an inde- pendent footing. 2 The centralisation will, however, be best seen from a short analysis of the Income Tax Schedule D (profits, exclusive of farms, &c), in the years 1864 and 1865. daily. Newcastle-on-Tyne, as the centre of a coal and iron district of growing productiveness, takes the next place after London in the housing inferno. 1 Tantse molis erat, to establish the "eternal laws of Nature" of the capitalist mode of production, to complete the process of separation between labourers and conditions of labour, to trans- form, at one pole, the social means of production and subsistence into capital, at the opposite pole, the mass of the population into wage-labourers, into "free labouring poor," that artificial product of modern society. G68 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION crises with which the industrial cycle periodically ends. 3 1. 1753, 1793, 1794.) "Your feeling upon the whole subject is that the better class of colliers who desire to raise themselves and humanise them- selves, instead of deriving help from the women, are pulled down by them?" "Yes." (n. Therefore, if no more than 1 lb. of Fact., 31st Oct., 1866," p. 2 Capital is dead labour, that, vampire-like, only lives by sucking living labour, and lives the more, the more labour it sucks. But a glass furnace has several openings (in England from 4 to 6), each of which contains an earthenware melting-pot full of molten glass, and employs a similar five-mem- bered group of workers. 4d.; their total income, £36 2s.; deficit made 1 Dr. Richard Price: "Observations on Reversionary Payments," 6th Ed. By W. On the former day the excess is nearly 12 per cent, over the average number of the four first days of the week, and on the latter day the excess is 25 per cent, over the average of the preceding five days; or, if the number of working-hours on Saturday being taken into account — Vl 2 hours on Saturday as compared with 10 x / 2 on other days— there is an excess of 65 per cent, on Saturdays MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 427 some accompaniments of the productive process, not to mention fche robbery of appliances for the comfort of the workman. If, therefore, on the one hand, it presents itself historically as a progress and as a neces- sary phase in the economic development of society, on the other hand, it is a refined and civilised method of exploitation. Com., II. The appear- ance of the two equivalents, commodities and money, at the t'svo poles of the process of sale, has ceased to be simultaneous. I mean their money-form. But in the expression of value there is a complete turn of the tables. He has explained the apparent relation between objects, such as diamonds and pearls, in which relation they appear as exchange-val- ues, and disclosed the true relation hidden behind the appearances, namely, their relation to each other as mere expressions of human labour. 3 "An hour's labour lost in a day is a prodigious injury to a commer- cial State.... As a commodity, it is a citizen of that world. The laws of this centralisation of capitals, or of the attrac- tion of capital by capital, cannot be developed here. It was just now the height of the season. of Fact.," 31st. In the text Senior converts the last 2/23 of the product into portions of the working-day itself. In the paper industry generally, we may advantageously study in detail not only the distinctions between modes of production based on different means of production, but also the connexion of the social conditions of production with those modes: for the old German paper-making furnishes us with a sample of handicraft production; that of Holland in the 17th and of France in the 18th century with a sample of manufacturing in the strict sense; and that of modern England with a sample of automatic fabrication of this article. . The girls stand round the stove, which throws out a terrific heat, and dries the cambrics rapidly for the ironers. 32. 8 The self-expansion of capital by means of machinery is thenceforward directly proportional to the number of the work- people, whose means of livelihood have been destroyed by that machinery. 2 How is that value- determined? A greater number of labour- ers working together, at the same time, in one place (or, if you will, in the same field of labour), in order to produce the same sort of commodity under the mastership of one capitalist, constitutes, both historically and logically, the starting-point of capitalist production. a. But since this applies to every owner, there is, in fact, no commodity acting as uni- versal equivalent, and the relative value of commodities possesses no general form under which they can be equated as values and have the magnitude of their values compared. So soon as the handling of this tool becomes the work of a machine, then, with the use-value, the exchange-value too, of the workman's labour-power vanishes; the workman becomes unsaleable, like paper money thrown out of currency by legal enactment. Henceforward we use it to designate also the time necessary for the production of the particular commodity la- bour-power. Coroner's inquests.— "With regard to coroner's inquests in your district, have the workmen confidence in the pro- ceedings at those inquests when accidents occur?" "No; they have not." (n. Gold is in form D, what linen was in form C — the universal equiva- lent. 1 Nay more, in this work of changing the form he is constantly helped by natural forces. But it is only in the factory system that this inversion for the first time acquires technical and palpable reality. (1) Either there is too much corn and cattel in the country, so that most who come to market have need of selling, as he hath, and few of buying; or (2) There wants the usual vent abroad by trans- portation...; or (3) The consumption fails, as when men, by reason of poverty, do not spend so much in their houses as formerly they did; wherefore it is not the increase of specific money, which would at all advance the farmer's goods, but the removal of any of these three causes, which do truly keep down the market ... The detailed analysis of the process will be found in Book II. II. To-morrow the article may, either altogether or par- tially, be superseded by some other appropriate product. On the one hand, the old world constantly throws in capital, thirsting after exploi- tation and "abstinence"; on the other, the regular reproduction of the wage-labourer as wage-labourer comes into collision with im- pediments the most impertinent and in part invincible. 1, 181,455 lbs. The labourer adds fresh value to the subject of his labour by expending upon it a given amount of additional labour, no matter what the specific character and utility of that labour may be. 16, 21.) 2 1. Among other things it is said: "From an elaborate comparison between the diet of convicts in the convict prisons in England, and that of paupers in work- houses and of free labourers in the same country ... The equality of all sorts of human labour is expressed objectively by their products all being equally val- ues; the measure of the expenditure of labour-power by the du- ration of that expenditure, takes the form of the quantity of value of the products of labour; and finally, the mutual relations of the producers, within which the social character of their labour affirms itself, take the form of a social relation between the prod- ucts. c. And so the ball rolls on. 13, 14. 126.) 231 CH APTER X THE WORKING-DAY SECTION 1.— THE LIMITS OF THE WORKING-DAY We started with the supposition that Labour-power is bought and sold at its value. 1 The consumption of labour-power by capital is, besides, so rapid that the labourer, half-way through his life, has already more or less completely lived himself out. That this is a well understood system is plain . On the whole, therefore, during the period from 1844 to 1847, the 12 hours' working-day became general and uniform in all branches of industry under the Factory Act. And the oppressions are daily on the increase. Nevertheless, its result is: (1) that the product belongs to the capitalist and not to the worker; (2) that the value of this product includes, besides the value of the capital advanced, a surplus-value which costs the worker labour but the capitalist nothing, and which none the less becomes the legitimate prop- erty of the capitalist; (3) that the worker has retained his labour-power and can sell it anew if he can find a buyer. The workpeople are thus continually both repelled and attracted, hustled from pillar to post, while, at the same time, constant changes take place in the sex, age, and skill of the levies. 30. Mill says: "The cause of profit is that labour produces more than is required for its support." So far, nothing but the old story; but Mill wishing to add something of his own, proceeds: "To vary the form of the theorem; the reason why capital yields a profit, is because food, clothing, materials and tools, last longer than the time which was required to produce them." He here con- founds the duration of labour-time with the duration of its prod- ucts. 242 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION have been so employed if sufficient time had been set apart spe- cially for cleaning, &c, either before 6 a. 9.) 86 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION of his. The most important factor in this inquiry, is the composition of capital and the changes it undergoes in the course of the process of accumulation. We there stated, p. 2 Gaskell. Wages do not contribute, x "Ricardo says: 'In different stages of society the accumulation ol cap- ital or of the means of employing' (i.e., exploiting) 'labour is more or less rapid, and must in all cases depend on the productive powers of labour. m., into the 12 hours from 6 a. E. It is very characteristic that the enthusiastic apologists of the factory system have nothing more damning to urge against a general organisation of the labour of society, than that it would turn all society into one immense fac- tory. On the other hand, the expanded expression of relative value, the endless series of equations, has now become the form peculiar to the relative value of the money-commodity. 2 Commodities, therefore, in which equal quantities of labour are embodied, or which can be produced in the same time, have the same value. B. He says: "The yarn is of no use to me: I produced it for sale." In that case let him sell it, or, still better, let him for the future produce only things for satisfying his personal wants, a remedy that his phy- sician MacCulloch has already prescribed as infallible against an epidemic of over-production. per hour, that it stands in painful contrast to the amount of injury produced to the health and stamina of the workpeople. I have shown by the example of Ricardo in what way their false conception of the laws that regulate the quantity of the circulating medium, 144 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION chiefly and necessarily in those periods when the customary equi- librium in the interchange of products between different nations is suddenly disturbed. m. The body of the commodity that serves as the equivalent, figures as the materialisation of human labour in the abstract, and is at the same time the product of some specifically useful concrete labour. Let us look at the matter a little closer. They are but two different modes of ex- pending human labour-power. We wish to part with a useless thing, in order to get one that we need; we want to give less for more. represent the 4s. Sufferings have been inflicted in the Highlands scarcely less severe than those occasioned by the policy of the Norman kings. . 2 Some gang-masters, however, have worked themselves up to the posi- tion of farmers of 500 acres, or proprietors of whole rows of houses. "It must be remem- bered, too, that there has been more than two years of great suf- fering (in consequence of the terrible crisis of 1846-47) among the factory operatives, from many mills having worked short time, and many being altogether closed. of yarn, o having a value of 30s. The labour which cre- ates Use-Value, and counts qualitatively is Work, as distinguished from Labour; that which creates Value and counts quantitatively, is Labour as distinguished from Work. No sooner has one set been defaced or covered over, than a fresh set is placarded in the former, or some equally public place. Holland, which first fully developed the colonial system, in 1648 stood already in the acme of its commer- cial greatness. The quantity of money thrown into the circulation at the beginning of each day is of course de- termined by the sum of the prices of all the commodities circulat- ing simultaneously side by side. Lord Shaftesbury's Bill limited the hours of children's labour," &c. to 6d. Townsend) 1786," republished Lond. Such a thing, in truth, cannot exist, says Aristotle. 21.) 8 John Fielden, 1. 58.) "When the labourers receive wages for their labour ... In its turn, this increasing accumula tion and centralisation becomes a source of new changes in the 1 Note in the 3rd German edition. "Although my official point of view," he says, "is one exclusively physical, common humanity requires that the other aspect of this evil should not be ignored .... His report, 2 together with the evidence given, roused not the heart of the public but its stomach. 88, 89.) 156 CHAPTER V CONTRADICTIONS IN THE GENERAL FORMULA OF CAPITAL The form which circulation takes when money becomes capi- tal, is opposed to all the laws we have hitherto investigated bearing on the nature of commodities, value and money, and even of circulation itself. In order to labour productively, it is no longer neces- ABSOLUTE AND RELATIVE SURPLUS-VALUE 509 sary for you to do manual work yourself; enough, if you are an organ of the collective labourer, and perform one of its subordi- nate functions. The straw cuts their mouths, with which they constantly moisten it, and their fingers. 5. that we can take in hand these modified forms of surplus- value. . Rep.," p. When numerous labourers work together side by side, wheth- er in one and the same process, or in different but connected proc- esses, they are said to co-operate, or to work in co-operation. Never mind! Say declares that, in consequence of increased productivity, every one now receives in return for a given equivalent two pairs of stockings instead of one as before. c, p. And the number of these combinations is augmented by the fact that, when these factors simultaneously vary, the amount and direction of their respective variations may differ. is different in this table from that which appears in the preceding ones, because of certain deductions allowed by law. This occurs whenever the rise in the price of labour-power does not compensate for its in- creased wear and tear. "Ueber die Entar- tung des Menschen," Erlangen, 1868. 314) (present volume, p. It is only really useful when it acts on great masses, when a single machine can assist the work of thousands. But take the figures as they stand; we then have for England and Wales alone, according to the census of 1861, a total of 1,024,277 persons, about as many as are absorbed by agricul- ture and cattle breeding. the MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OF COMMODITIES 127 without value, such as paper notes, can serve as coins in its place. m. This, however, is possible only in a society in which the great mass of the produce of labour takes the form of commodities, in which, consequently, the dominant relation between man and man, is that of owners of commodities. . There will, perhaps, be more labour, because there will be more compulsion to it. In future he will buy the commodities in the market, instead of manufacturing them himself. W T ho fails here to call to mind our good friend, Dogberry, who informs neighbour Seacoal, that, "To be a well-favoured man is the gift of fortune; but reading and writing comes by Nature." 3 1 "Observations on certain verbal disputes in Pol. 51-52.) We shall, in a later chapter, see how our friends, the manufacturers, endeavoured, during the catastrophe in the cotton trade, to prevent by every means, including State interference, the emigration of the operatives. "The mere sense that they exist subject to this species of ban, on the part of the landlords and their agents, has . I cannot say what this would be, but probably it would not be enough to enable the manufacturers to raise the price of steel, and con- sequently it would fall on them, as of course the men (what queer-headed folk!) would refuse to pay it." Mr. Sanderson does not know how much he pays the children, but "perhaps the young- er boys get from 4s. Finally, the improvements in the operative machines have, while reducing their size, in- creased their speed and efficiency, as in the modern power-loom; or, while increasing the size of their framework, have also in- creased the extent and number of their working parts, as in spin- ning-mules, or have added to the speed of these working parts by imperceptible alterations of detail, such as those which ten years ago increased the speed of the spindles in self-acting mules by one- fifth. "To push the sale of opiate ... The most notable political economist of that period — E. 368-370. E.g. "C'est li compte que messire Jacques de Thoraine, chevalier chastelain sor Besangon rent es-seig- neur tenant les comptes a Dijon pour monseigneur le due et comte de Bourgoi- gne, des rentes appartenant a la dite chastellenie, depuis xxve jour de decem- breMCCCLIX jusqu'au xxviiie jour de decembre MGCCLX." (Alexis Monteil: "Traite de Materiaux Manuscrits etc.," pp. 2 In the Coventry silk weav- ing industry the experiment of "cottage factories" was tried. The 15 shillings are by no means the expression in money of all the labour expended in one hour by the 66 men. Hence its name (toxo; interest and off- spring). 4, 5. One Eskrigge, cotton-spinner, of the firm of Kershaw, Leese, & Co., had laid before the Factory Inspector of his district the scheme of a re- lay system intended for his mill. m. Man is bartered for a fleece or a carcase of mutton, nay, held cheaper .... One step already spontaneously taken towards effecting this revolution is the establishment of technical and agricultural schools, and of "ecoles d'enseignement professional," in which the children of the working-men receive some little instruction in technology and in the practical handling of the various im- plements of labour. Vincent Street, Green Aire Place, and the Leys include 223 houses having 1,450 inhabit- ants, 435 beds, and 36 privies The beds — and in that term I include any roll of dirty old rags, or an armful of shavings — have an average of 3.3 persons to each, many have 5 and 6 persons to each, and some people, I am told, are absolutely without beds; they sleep in their ordinary clothes, on the bare boards — young men and women, married and unmarried, all together. In showing how frequently it happens that adult per- sons of both sexes, married and unmarried, are huddled togeth- er in single small sleeping rooms, their reports have carried the conviction that, under the circumstances they describe, decency or £b annual rent for houses not worth j£20 in a really free market, but main- tained at their artificial value by the power of the owner to say 'Use my house, or go seek a hiring elsewhere, without a character from me.' .... In the present case this condition no longer applies. Thus people speak of the value of labour and call its expression in money its necessary or natural price. The more the capi- talist has accumulated, the more is he able to accumulate. It was not enough that the bank gave with one hand and took back more with the other; it remained, even whilst receiving, the eternal creditor of the nation down to the last shilling advanced. to 6 p. l These anti- thetic and complementary phases, of which the process of meta- 1 "Ce sont ies productions qui le (l'argent) mettent en mouvement et le font circuler ... And the Nuisances Removal Acts .... The maximum loss of value that they can suffer in the process, is plainly limit- ed by the amount of the original value with which they came into the process, or in other words, by the labour-time necessary for their production. As to its use-value, that has only MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OF COMMODITIES 105 an ideal existence, represented by the series of expressions of relative value in which it stands face to face with all other com- modities, the sum of whose uses makes up the sum of the various uses of gold. 75, 76.) 2 "Treating labour as a commodity, and capital, the produce of labour, as another, then, if the values of these two commodities were regulated by equal quantities of labour, a given amount of labour would ... In the interest of the so-called national wealth, he seeks for artificial means to ensure the poverty of the people. [for meals]. First Report, &c, p. m., or as the usual phrase is, "all hours," and that in localities where "the stench is enough to knock you down, you go to the door, perhaps, and open it, but 1 "Child. 5. But in presence of such shameful facts as are vouched for in the annexed reports [those of Dr. Hun- ter, Dr. Stevens, &c] a remedy may well be claimed Claims of landlordship are being so used as to do great public wrong. (2.) Berkshire Beenham. If one hour's labour is embodied in sixpence, a value of six shillings will be produced in a working-day of 12 hours. M. 55.) "Capital is commodities." (James Mill: "Elements of Pol. 2 Thus, among others, Mr. W. Its fisheries, marine, manufactures, surpassed those of any other country. We should then have 20 yds. No doubt, the capitalist can, instead of five shillings, pay the labourer four shil- lings and sixpence or even less. 1 2 families York Street, No. 34 . of this law runs: "L'aneantissement de toute espece de corpo- rations du meme etat et profession etant Time des bases fondamentales de la constitution francaise, il est defendu de les retablir de fait sous quelque pre- texte et sous quelque forme que ce soit." Article IV. An underseller, who sells his bread below the cost-price according to the price of flour, must make it up by getting more out of the la- bour of the men.... As a periodic increment of the capital ad- vanced, or periodic fruit of capital in process, surplus-value acquires the form of a revenue flowing out of capital. The over-crowding in these dens and the consequent vitiation of the air are often extreme. In pro- portion as industry advances, these natural limits recede. Empl. Insp. Even the very youngest children work with a strained attention and a rapidity that is astonishing, hardly ever giving their fingers rest or slowering their motion. Total yearly income f 4,368,610 divided among 17,467 persons. It is essentially the command over unpaid labour. 674. The total number of persons of both sexes and of all ages from 3 years upwards, em- ployed in stocking making in England, was in 1862 about 129,000. Anderson (not to be con- founded with James Anderson) in his "History of Commerce," believe in the direct intervention of Providence. To understand its march, we need not go back very far. 74, 75.) POO CAPITALIST PRODUCTION along with labour, to the production of commodities, no more than the price of tools contributes along with the tools them- selves. . Practically, therefore, the only thing that interests him is the differ- ence between the price of labour-power and the value which its function creates. 241.) 620 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION that makes capital insufficient; but, conversely, the relative diminution of capital that causes the exploitable labour-power, or rather its price, to be in excess. 1 Here we have the machine, but only as an elementary factor of production by machinery. 51, 52.) Mr. Molinari, Mr. Molinari! What then becomes of the ten commandments, of Moses and the prophets, of the law of supply and demand, if in Europe the "entrepreneur" can cut down the labourer's legitimate part, and in the West Indies, the labourer can cut down the entrepreneur's? 3 This is more the case in England than in France, and more in France than in Holland. . If, on the other hand, all the conduits of circulation were to-day filled with paper money to the full extent of their capacity for absorbing money, they might to-morrow be overflowing in con- sequence of a fluctuation in the circulation of commodities. He requires also the means of subsistence. Elementary or Accidental form of value x commodity A=y commodity B, or x commodity A is worth y commodity B. It turned chiefly on the age of those who, under the name of children, were limited to 8 hours' work, and were subject to a certain amount of compulsory education. The organisation of the capi- talist process of production, once fully developed, breaks down all resistance. . The 18th century, however, did not yet recognise as fully as the 19th, the identity between national wealth and the poverty of the people. They now protested in Lancashire and Yorkshire in threatening meetings. Since 1846 various sorts of machines have been introduced, which are now driven by steam. 2 1. Child, etc., to Adam Smith aod Eden. 102. Redgrave, out of the 2,109 mills included in his district, 392, or 19% employed less than ten horse-power each; 345, or 16% employed 10 H. We should then have 20 yds. l The implements of labour, in the form of machinery, necessi- tate the substitution of natural forces for human force, and the conscious application of science, instead of rule of thumb. I., p 109. m. Labour? till 12 p. By a person in business. II., pp. A has converted his £40 into £50, has made more money out of less, and has converted his commodities into capital. Here we must rather say, "Where equality exists there can be no gain." 4 It is true, commod- 1 "Mercier de la Riviere," 1. . of Fact., 31st Oct., 1866," p. In England the horse-power of an engine was formerly cal- culated from the diameter of its cylinder, now the actual horse-power shown hv the indicator is taken. 66. For children's labour only the work-time is prescribed as between 5 a. The value that he preserves in the product is directly proportional to the new value that he adds to the product. The first distinction we notice between money that is money only, and money that is capital, is nothing more than a differ- ence in their form of circulation. "Landlords and farmers," says Dr. Hunter, "work here hand in hand. A considerable number of the operatives must therefore be in very narrow cir- cumstances; many, it is to be feared, in debt; so that it might fairly have been presumed that at the present time they would prefer working the longer time, in order to make up for past losses, perhaps to pay off debts, or get their furniture out of pawn, or replace that sold, or to get a new supply of clothes for them- selves and their families." 1 The manufacturers tried to aggravate the natural effect of these circumstances by a general reduction of wages by 10%. Thereby the bodily form of this commodity becomes the form of the socially recognised universal equivalent. The quantity of bread-stuffs consumed 3 1 weekly varied from 7-r- lbs. Price, 1. It is only necessary for cap- ital to incorporate this additional labour-power, annually sup- plied by the working-class in the shape of labourers of all ages, with the surplus means of production comprised in the annual produce, and the conversion of surplus-value into capital is complete. . Deduct- ing these there remains the net or surplus-product, in which the surplus-value lies. * Reports, &c, for 30th April, 1848, p. c, p. We now know what portion of the value of the yarn is ow- ing to the cotton and the spindle. 2 Babbage estimates that in Java the spinning labour alone adds 117% to the value of the cotton. of Fact, for 31st Oct., 1858.) CAPITALIST PRODUCTION their moral code, and especially by their ledgers, that it was only after the passing of the Act that they had recourse to machinery. In some places they are said to have been introduced at comparatively late dates; in others where gangs .... Horner in "Rep. But how use-values, which are incommensurable with regard to each other, are to be exchanged, en masse, for the total sum of gold and silver in a country, is quite incomprehensible. c, p. ("Ch. Empl. c, p. p. Torrens: "An Essay on the External Corn Trade." Lond. 16, 19, 18. A few weeks ago 13 persons slept in it." 2 Dr. Hunter investigated 5,375 cottages of agricultural la- bourers, not only in the purely agricultural districts, but in all counties of England. there is plenty of air generally in the main courses, yet pains are not taken to get air into the workings where men are working." "Why do you not apply to the inspector?" "To tell the truth there are many men who are timid on that point; there have been cases of men being sacrificed and losing their employment in consequence of apply- ing to the inspector." "Why; is he a marked man for having com- plained?" "Yes." "And he finds it difficult to get employment in another mine?" "Yes." "Do you think the mines in your neigh- bourhood are sufficiently inspected to insure a compliance with the provisions of the Act?" "No; they are not inspected at all . 8 C. The progress of our investigation will show that exchange-value is the only form in which the value of commodities can manifest itself or be expressed. Bron- chitis is more prevalent owing to the dust. There remains £132 as the weekly value created, which =£52 var.+£80surpl.The rate of sur- plus-value is therefore ^=153^%. There alone had the popu- lation formerly found shelter from the incessant floods of the winter-time. 109. If in the mean- time the original capital, say £6,000, has increased to £18,000, its variable constituent has also increased. 174). 8d., for a woman, Is. 8d., for a boy, Is. 2-^- d. (1. The inhabitants give themselves no trouble about the breaking up and division of kingdoms; while the village remains entire, they care not to what power it is transferred, or to what sovereign it devolves; its internal economy remains unchanged." (Th. Stamford Raffles, late Lieut. In all states of society, the labour-time that it costs to produce the means of subsistence, must necessarily be an object of interest to mankind, though not of equal interest in different stages of development. If they were kept up there would be a waste of fuel (instead of, as now, a waste of the living substance of the workers), and if they were not, there would be loss of time in laying the fires and getting the heat up (whilst the loss of sleeping time, even to chil- dren of 8 is a gain of working-time for the Sanderson tribe), and the furnaces themselves would suffer from the changes of tem- perature." (Whilst those same furnaces suffer nothing from the day and night change of labour.) 1 1 1. The capitalist who produces surplus-value — i.e., who ex- tracts unpaid labour directly from the labourers, and fixes it in com- modities, is, indeed, the first appropriator, but by no means the ultimate owner, of this surplus-value. * But it is the former difference alone that determines the cost, to the capitalist, of producing a commodity, and, through the pressure of competition, influences his action. . 136, n. 1 Division of labour in a society, and the corresponding tying down of individuals to a particular calling, develops itself, just as does the division of labour in manufacture, from opposite starting- points. 2 But our popu- lace have adopted a notion, that as Englishmen they enjoy a birthright privilege of being more free and independent than in any country in Europe. In order to inform us that its sublime reality as value is not the same as its buckram body, it says that value has the appearance of a coat, and consequently that so far as the linen is value, it and the coat are as like as two peas. That portion of the working-day, then, during which this reproduction takes place, 1 In the same way that the English use the terms "rate of profit," "rate of interest." We shall see, in Book III., that the rate of profit is no mystery, so soon as we know the laws of surplus-value. THE WORKING-DAY 289 against mill-owners for a breach of the letter of the Act, or for employment of young persons by relays in cases in which there is no reason to believe that such young persons have been actually employed for a longer period than that sanctioned by law." Hereupon, Factory Inspector J. The barba- rous laws against Trades' Unions fell in 1825 before the threatening bearing of the proletariat. the inspector has been down just once in the pit, and it has been going seven years. In times long gone by there were two sorts of people; one, the diligent, intelligent, and, above all, frugal elite; the other, lazy rascals, spending their substance, and more, in riotous living. . This conversion takes place in the market, within the sphere of circulation. No, he produces capital. For the present, let this one quotation from the official report of Leonard Horner suffice: "I have heard some mill-owners speak with inexcusable levityof some of the accidents; such, for instance, as the loss of a finger being a trifling matter. Of course, this development of productive power is accompanied by a partial depreciation of functioning capital. of Insp. How Modern Industry, when it has attained to a certain pitch, is capable, by the revolution it effects in the mode of production and in the social conditions of production, of also revolutionising people's minds, is strikingly shown by a comparison of Senior's speech in 1863, with his philippic against the Factory Act of 1833; or by a comparison, of the views of the congress above referred to, with the fact that in certain country dis- tricts of England poor parents are forbidden, on pain of death by starvation, to educate their children. 1753, 1793, 1794.) "Your feeling upon the whole subject is that the better class of colliers who desire to raise themselves and humanise them- selves, instead of deriving help from the women, are pulled down by them?" "Yes." (n. Hence, leaving waste on one side, 366 lbs. 1860.-16,574,345 lbs. The gang in its classical form just described, is called the public, common, or tramping gang. The events that take place outside the sphere of circulation, in the interval between the buying and selling, do not affect the form of this movement. 1 Morning Star, 23rd June, 1863.— The Times made use of the circumstance to defend the American slave-owners against Bright, &c. The exodus of the next 20 years, an exodus still constantly increasing, did not, as, e.g., the Thir- ty Years' War, decimate, along with the human beings, their means of production. Fielden: "The Curse of the Factory System", Lond., 1836, p. . 290 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION allow themselves to be turned from their purpose. gives a decided preference to married females, especially those who have families at home dependent on them for support; they are attentive, docile, more so than unmarried females, and are compelled to use their utmost exertions to procure the necessaries of life. xvi-xviii, n. It is otherwise in the value- relation of one commodity to another. c, p. as soon as it rises to 15 hours. l They were locked up in that "moral workhouse," the cotton districts, and they form, as before, 'the strength" of the cotton manufacturers of Lancashire. 6). ... As mining did not turn out remunerative enough, I left it for the town, where in succession I became typographer, slater, plumber. When Sir R. To produce results so disadvantageous to the country generally, and to the factory workers in particular, several causes have co-operated, which, had circumstances permitted, we should have brought more prominent- ly under your notice; suffice it for the present to say that the most obvious one is the constant redundancy of labour, without which a trade so ruinous in its effects never could have been carried on, and which requires a constantly extending market to save it from annihilation. . No sooner had Everet in 1758 erected the first wool-shearing machine that was driven by water-power, than it was set on fire by 100,000 people who had been thrown out of work. 6.) As to the fatal consequences of "this system of slavery," as the official report styles it, see I. Therefore, piece- wage also varies, for it is the money expression of a determined working-time. till 12 p. 5) Domestic Workshops, where only members of the family are employed, in the family dwelling: still more elastic regulations and simultaneously the restriction that the inspector may, without special permission of the ministry or a court, enter only rooms not used also for dwelling purposes; and lastly unrestricted freedom for straw-plaiting and lace- and glove-making by mem- bers of the family. 3 1 The monetary crisis referred to in the text, being a phase of every crisis, must be clearly distinguished from that particular form of crisis, which also is called a monetary crisis, but which may be produced by itself as an independent phenomenon in such a way as to react only indirectly on indus- try and commerce. the earn- ings of the operatives rise and fall with the quality of the cotton mixings; sometimes they have been within 15 per cent, of former earnings, and then, in a week or two, they have fallen off from 50 to 60 per cent." 4 These experiments were not made solely at the expense of the workman's means of subsistence. In the automatic factories, as in all the great workshops, where machinery enters as a factor, or where only the modern division of labour is carried out, large numbers of boys are employed up to the age of maturity. I860.— 1 in 8. They trusted in the conditions of the time, that these possessions would not be again taken from them, and bought, therefore, some of the pieces of land lying near theirs, and belonging to the poor, with the acquiescence of their owners, and took some EXPROPRIATION OP AGRICULTURAL POPULATION 727 usurpation of the common lands and the revolution in agricul- ture accompanying this, told so acutely on the agricultural labourers that, even according to Eden, between 1765 and 1780, their wages began to fall below the minimum, and to be supple- mented by official poor-law relief. 59, 60. c, p. 298 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION SECTION 7.— THE STRUGGLE FOR THE NORMAL WORKING-DAY. THE WORKING-DAY 253 So far, we have dealt with Ireland. Dr. Farre expressed himself still more coarsely. of Fact, for 31st Oct., 1862," pp. The number of saving and industrious labourers will increase, because they will see in good conduct, in activity, a means of essentially bettering their condition, and not of obtaining a small rise of wages that can never be of any importance for the future, and whose sole result is to place men in the position to live a little better, but only from day to day... 29.) James Harris, afterwards Earl of Malmesbury, celebrated for the "Diaries" of his embassy at St. Petersburg, says in a note to his "Dialogue Concerning Happiness," Lond., 1741, reprinted afterwards in "Three Treatises, &c," 3 Ed., Lond., 1772: "The whole argument to prove society natural (i.e., by division of employments) ... The 3 other days he does forced work on the lord's domain. If worker B is paid out of the surplus-value which worker A produced, then, in the first place, A furnished that sur- plus-value without having the just price of his commodity cut by a halfpenny, and, in the second place, the transaction is no concern of B's whatever. 2 These formulae, which 1 The insufficiency of Ricardo's analysis of the magnitude of value, and his analysis is by far the best, will appear from the 3rd and 4th books of this work. Berlin, 1842, p. It is an old English proverb that "when thieves fall out, honest men come by their own," and, in fact, the noisy, passion- ate quarrel between the two fractions of the ruling class about the question, which of the two exploited the labourers the more shamefully, was on each hand the midwife of the truth. Four hours have been set free, and can be annexed to the domain of surplus- labour. The continuity of the movement is therefore kept up by the money alone, and 1 Even when the commodity is sold over and over again, a phenomenon that at present has no existence for us, it falls, when definitely sold for the last time, out of the sphere of circulation into that of consumption, where it serves either as means of subsistence or means of production. This he calls "systematic colonisation." First of all, Wakefield discovered that in the Colonies, property in money, means of subsistence, machines, and other means of production, does not as yet stamp a man as a capitalist if there be wanting the correlative— the wage-worker, the other man who is compelled to sell himself of his own free-will. 2 It is thus that the pound sterling in English denotes less than one- third of its original weight; the pound Scot, before the union, only l-36th; the French livre, l-74th; the Spanish maravedi, less than 1-1, 000th; and the Portuguese rei a still smaller fraction. And am I to be allowed nothing in return for all this service?" Well, but has not the labourer rendered him the equivalent service of changing his cotton and spindle into yarn? If now we take in turn each of the two different forms which self-expanding value successively assumes in the course of its life, we then arrive at these two prop- ositions: Capital is money: Capital is commodities. 247,012,529 lbs. It will be seen later that the labour expended during the so-called normal day is paid below its value, so that the over-time is simply a capitalist trick in order to extort more surplus-labour, which it would still be, even if the labour-power expend- ed during the normal working-day were properly paid. c, p. The hand-mule spinners and self-actor minders put an end to the exper- iment by a petition to their employers in whicl they say, "Plainly speaking, our lives are to us a burthen; and, while we are confined to the mills nearly two days a iceek more than the other operatives of the country, we feel like helots in the land, and that we are perpetuating a system injurious to ourselves and future generations.... It has existed for three generations of the English race, and I believe I may safely say that during that period it has destroyed nine generations of factory operatives." 2 No doubt in certain epochs of feverish activity the labour- market shows significant gaps. On the other hand, the working-day has a maximum limit. 282. There the master is the absolute law-giver. What really influenced him was the specific use-value which this commodity possesses of being a source not only of value, but of more value than it has itself. • Sir J. But in spite of this equality, an immense difference will obtain between the value of the week's product of the Englishman, who works with a mighty automaton, and that of the Chinaman, who has but a spinning-wheel. c. The estates of the church were to a large extent given away to rapacious royal favourites, or sold at a nominal price to speculating farmers and citizens, who drove out, en masse, the hereditary sub-tenants and threw their holdings into one. Redgrave, the factory inspector, in a lecture given at Bradford, in the New Mechanics' Institution, said: "What has struck me for some time past is the altered appearance of the woollen factories. But it did not regulate in any way the 6— hours' work of the children whose work-time began at 12 mid- day or later. Value Export- ed. Creation of value is transformation of labour-power into labour. A., etc. The fact that this minimum mass continually un- dergoes changes in its constituent parts, or that the pieces of gold of which it consists are being constantly replaced by fresh ones, causes of course no change either in its amount or in the continuity of its circulation. Ure prefers therefore, to describe the central machine, from which the motion comes, not only as an automaton, but as Value Export- ed, 1848. . If, for example, we wish to calculate the amount of England's profits from the cotton industry, we first of all deduct the sums paid for cotton to the United States, India, Egypt and other countries; in other words, the value of the capital that merely re-appears in the value of the product, is put =0. Edit.: Lond. Dublin, 1770, v. To put it mathematically: the rate of accumulation is the independ- ent, not the dependent, variable; the rate of wages, the depend- ent, not the independent, variable. "The masters and their workmen are, unhappily, in a perpetual war with each other. 713 PART Mil THE SO-CALLED PRIMITIVE ACCUMULATION CHAPTER XXVI THE SECRET OF PRIMITIVE ACCUMULATION We have seen how money is changed into capital; how through capital surplus-value is made, and from sur- plus-value more capital. d s. Parte Moderna t. c, p. 88,901,519 lbs. taking direct measures to insure it." (1. 8 Peasant agriculture on a small scale, and the carrying on of independ- ent handicrafts, which together form the basis of the feudal mode of produc- tion, and after the dissolution of that system, continue side by side with the capitalist mode, also form the economic foundation k of the classical com- munities at their best, after the primitive form of ownership of land in com- mon had disappeared, and before slavery had seized on production in earnest. 1 "We, the workers of Dunkirk, declare that the length of time of labour required under the present system is too great, and that, tar from leaving the worker time for rest and education, it plunges him into a condition ot servitude but little better than slavery. The increase of profits liable to income tax (farmers and some other categories not included) in Great Britain from 1853 to 1864 amounted to 50.47% or 4.58% as the annual average, 1 that of the population during the same period to about 12%. That money is a commodity 1 is therefore a new discovery only for those who, when they analyse it, start from its fully de- veloped shape. We are only concerned here with striking and general characteristics; for epochs in the history of society are no more separated from each other by hard and fast lines of demarcation, than are geological epochs. 13. and 6 p. W. Nevertheless, if to-morrow morning labour generally were re- duced to a rational amount, and proportioned to the different sec- tions of the working-class according to age and sex, the working population to hand would be absolutely insufficient for the carrying on of national production on its present scale. pepper and sweet herbs, in all 20— d.; make a soup for 64 men, and at the medium price of barley and of Indian corn .... One firm in Newcastle, who formerly produced 350,000 lbs. In most striking contrast with this accentuation of quantity and exchange- value, is the attitude of the writers of classical antiqui- ty, who hold exclusively by quality and use-value. No matter, then, what we may think of the parts played by the different classes of people themselves in this soci- ety, the social relations between individuals in the performance of their labour, appear at all events as their own mutual personal relations, and are not disguised under the shape of social relations between the products of labour. By the currency of the circulating medium, the connexion between buyers and sellers, is not merely expressed. Six adults, living with 4 children in one sleep- ing apartment, pay £3 10s. Accumulation of capital is, therefore, increase of the proletariat. He has no fears for the future, because he has now only the spare supply necessary to keep him. The only requisite is that there be a sufficient supply to absorb the labour expended in the process of production. To you, therefore, belongs the use of my daily labour- power. The general public, who, simultaneously with the retar- dation of the currency, see money appear and disappear less fre- quently at the periphery of circulation, naturally attribute this retardation to a quantitative deficiency in the circulating medium. Clothed in a few dirty rags, the legs naked far above the knees, hair and face besmeared with dirt, they learn to treat all feelings of decency and of shame with contempt. The total num- ber of civil engineers amounted to 3,329. Importun a tout autre, a soi-meme incommode, II change a tout moment d 'esprit comme de mode." ("The Theory of Exchanges, &c," London, 1864, p. In fact, the events that transformed the small peasants into wage-labourers, and their means of subsistence and of labour into material elements of capital, created, at the same time, a home- market for the latter. The handicraft continues to be the basis. Anyhow the full-priced also, as was mentioned above, and as their spokes- man, Bennett, himself admits, make their men "generally begin work at 11 p. It thus appeared that the well-to-do classes had a lease of life which was more than double the value of that which fell to the lot of the less favoured citizens." x In order to conform to these circumstances, the absolute increase of this section of the prole- tariat must take place under conditions that shall swell their numbers, although the individual elements are used up rapidly. 3 by 8 ft. 318.) "Their (the capitalists') interest is that the productive powers of the labourers they employ should be the greatest possible. . Thus the laws of the production of value are only fully realised for the individual producer, when he produces as a capitalist, and employs a number of workmen together, whose labour, by its collective nature, is at once stamped as average so- cial labour. c, p. This qualitative change in mechanical industry continually discharges hands from the factory, or shuts its doors against the fresh stream of recruits, while the purely quantitative extension of the factories absorbs not only the men thrown out of work, but also fresh contin- gents. (12.) Worcestershire House-destruction here not quite so excessive; yet from 1851 to 1 '31, the number of inhabitants to each house on the average, has risen from 4.2 to 4.6. Badsey. I have been in many such 6chools, where I have seen rows of children doing absolutely noth- ing; and this is certified as school attendance, and, in statistical returns, such children are set down as being educated." 2 In ScoU land the manufacturers try all they can to do without the chil- dren that are obliged to attend school. It is clear, however, that air which has been once breathed, can no longer serve for the same process until it has been purified in the great workshop of Nature. Of this sum, twelve shillings belong to the value of the means of produc- tion, a value that merely re-appears. 1 In this way, not only are the ex- penses of his reproduction considerably lessened, but at the same time his helpless dependence upon the factory as a whole, and therefore upon the capitalist, is rendered complete. He himself relates on p. In all cases the power was hired at so much per loom. The same thing holds of the alluvial lands won by human endeavour, as in the island of Axholme and other parishes on the banks of the 1 A similar movement is seen during the last ten years in France; in proportion as capitalist production there takes possession of agriculture, it drives the "surplus" agricultural population into the towns. For it is a fact, that a mountain range laid out in forest is, in many cases, more profitable to the proprietor than when let as a sheep-walk The huntsman who wants a deer-forest limits his offers by no other calculation than the extent of his purse. 55-58. Not only is there, therefore, an increase of surplus-value, but the outlay necessary to obtain it diminishes. The over-crowding in these dens and the consequent vitiation of the air are often extreme. While great owners are thus escaping from poor-rates through the depopulation of lands over which 1 A show-village of this kind looks very nice, but is as unreal as the vil- lages that Catherine II. Arthur Young in his "Tour in Ireland," at the beginning of this century, already noticed the better nour- ishment of the latter. c, p. 7-j-d. is this a merely speculative objection?" (n. 11. 543. The value of the linen remains unaltered in mag- nitude, whether expressed in coats, coffee, or iron, or in number- less different commodities, the property of as many different own- ers. Commodity-owners never equate their own commodities to those of others, and exchange them on a large scale, without differ- ent kinds of commodities belonging to different owners being ex- changeable for, and equated as values to, one and the same special article. 31st Oct., 1865," p. pp. The total capital of the Republic was probably more important than that of all the rest of Europe put together." Giilich forgets to add that by 1648, the people of Holland were more over-worked, poorer and more brutally oppressed than those of all the rest of Europe put together. Factory Inspector Stuart, himself a Scotchman, and in contrast to' the English Factory Inspectors, quite taken captive by the capi- talistic method of thinking, remarks expressly on this letter which he incor- porates in his report that it is "the most useful of the communications which any of the factory-owners working with relays have given to those engaged in the same trade, and which is the most calculated to remove the prejudices of such of them as have scruples respecting any change of the arrangement of the hours of work." 312 PAET IT PRODUCTION OF RELATIVE SURPLUS-VALUE CHAPTER XII THE CONCEPT OF RELATIVE SURPLUS-VALUE That portion of the working-day which merely produces an equivalent for the value paid by the capitalist for his labour-power, has, up to this point, been treated by us as a constant magnitude, and such in fact it is, under given conditions of production and at a given stage in the economic development of society. per day was paid to a man, there being every day over-time for three or four hours, paid at the rate of 3d. Suppose, that with the prevailing productiveness of labour, 12 articles are produced in these 12 hours. 2 "Gold, yellow, glittering, precious gold! Thus much of this, will make black white; foul, fair; Wrong, right; base, noble; old, young; coward, valiant. On the basis of the same mode of social production, the division of capital into constant and va- riable differs in different branches of production, and within the same branch of production, too, this relation changes with changes in the technical conditions and in the social combinations of the processes of production. Magnitude of value expresses a relation of social production, it expresses the connexion that necessarily exists between a cer- tain article and the portion of the total labour-time of society required to produce it. Wheat, cwts 16,202,312 41,033,503 Barley, 3,669,653 6,624,800 Oats 3,174,801 4,426,994 Rye, 388,749 7,108 Flour, . "The Manufacturing Population of England," London, 1833, pp. With the accumu- lation of capital, therefore, the number of capitalists grows to a greater or less extent. The development of Modern Industry, therefore, cuts from under its feet, the very foundation on which the bourgeoisie produces and appropriates products. This was the period in which the right to prolong the hours of labour to an outrageous extent was established; 1 the period that was especially character- ised by an accelerated accumulation of capital here, by pauper^ ism there. Let the working-day be 12 hours. We have in fact assumed that prices=values. Seven thousand ... By means of its conversion into an automaton, the instrument of labour confronts the labourer, during the labour-process, in the shape of capital, of dead labour, that dominates, and pumps dry, living labour-power. By the quantity of the labour contained in it. On this occasion he commits the anachronism of making these men apply to the calculation, so far as their implements have to be taken into account, the annuity tables in current use on the London Exchange in the year 1817. c, p. 297.) This kind of examination becomes at last too much even for the chairman of the committee, and he interrupts with the observation: "You want a class of men who would look into ail the details of the mine, and would go into all the holes and corners, and go into the real facts . . As Thornton rightly has it, the English working-class was precipitated without any transition from its golden into its iron age. Freedom, because both buyer and seller of a commodity, say of labour-power, are constrained only by their own free will. Hence, the capitalist who applies the improved method of production, appro- priates to surplus-labour a greater portion of the working-day, than the other capitalists in the same trade. Let him produce 240,000 lbs. — This word is here used in its original significa- tion of the course or track pursued by money as it changes from hand to hand, a course which essentially differs from circulation. c, p. The afternoon shift must therefore consist of other children than those employed in the morning. . The moral character of girls bred in these schools, when married women, was shown above. They did not, for example, comprehend that machinery is the surest means of length- ening the working-day. We therefore find them substantially, but not consciously, worked out in classical Political Economy. A fixed minimum of efficiency in all la- bour is therefore assumed, and we shall see, later on, that capital- ist production provides the means of fixing this minimum. Money based upon credit implies on the other hand conditions, which, from our standpoint of the simple circulation of commodities, are as yet totally unknown to us. The unspeakable misery of the French agricultural population under Louis XIV., a misery so eloquently denounced by Boisguillebert, Marshal Vauban, and others, was due not only to the weight of the taxes, but also to the conversion of taxes in kind into money taxes. As with the stroke of an enchanter's wand, it endows barren money with the power of breeding and thus turns it into capital, without the necessity of its exposing itself to the troubles and risks inseparable from its employment 1 William Cobbett remarks that in England all public institutions are designated "royal"; as compensation for this, however, there is the "national" debt. Ch. Ganilh," 2eme ed., Paris, 1821, t. . ch. 447. "If China," says Mr. Stapleton, M.P., to his constituents, "should become a great manufacturing country, I do not see how the manufactu- ring population of Europe could sustain the contest without descending to the level of their competitors." (Times, Sept. 334.) We would here only point out, that Ricardo puts his own more profound interpretation upon the words of Destutt. If the value created by a working-day of 12 hours be, say, six shillings, then, although the mass of the articles produced varies with the productiveness of labour, the only result is that the value represented by six shillings is spread over a greater or less number of articles. i. c, p. So far as they are values, the coat and the linen are things of a like substance, objec- tive expressions of essentially identical labour. This, in passing into its new shape, incor- porates gratis the social advance made while its old shape was being used up. of Insp. The commodity owner can, by his labour, create value, but not self-expanding value. For, in the first place, however varied the useful kinds of labour, or productive activities, may be, it is a physiological fact, that they are func- tions of the human organism, and that each such function, what- ever may be its nature or form, is essentially the expenditure of human brain, nerves, muscles, &c. c, c. This extension of the surplus labour-time from b c to b' c, from 2 Jiours to 3 hours, is, however, evidently impossible, without a simultaneous con- THE CONCEPT OP RELATIVE SURPLUS-VALUE 313 traction of the necessary labour-time from a b into a b', from 10 hours to 9 hours. 1858 1861 1868 England and Wales 275,590 368,125 344,719 Scotland 21,624 30,110 31,864 Ireland 1,633 1,757 2,746 United Kingdom .... The same value in constant capital is embodied in more means of production, i.e., in more instru- ments of labour, materials of labour and auxiliary materials; it therefore also supplies more elements for the production both of use-value and of value, and with these more absorbers of labour. He exchanges his product directly for another commodity, with- out having first sold it. . 468 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION within a circle of 80 miles radius from Nottingham. But this was never allowed to go beyond the second reading, and the matter was thus protracted until at last the "great Liberal party," by an alliance with the Tories, found courage to turn against the very proletariat that had carried it into power. 3,983,880 No. 31,927 Acres. On the one side of the equation we have an ordinary commodity, which is in reality a use-value. These thousands are now breaking in upon the other quarters; always half-starv- ing, they cry their misery in our ears, they cry to Heaven, they tell us from their miserable dwellings, that it is impossible for them to find work, and useless for them to beg. It was not enough that the bank gave with one hand and took back more with the other; it remained, even whilst receiving, the eternal creditor of the nation down to the last shilling advanced. . . MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 411 introduction of the Factory Acts has strikingly shown that the mere shortening of the working-day increases to a wonderful degree the regularity, uniformity, order, continuity, and energy of the labour. One person there does the work formerly divided between two. most justly measured by labour" ("The works of B. . 139, § 23, 1st July, 1857.) 272 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION The first "Statute of Labourers" (23 Edward III., 1349) found its immediate pretext (not its cause, for legislation of this kind lasts centuries after the pretext for it has disappeared) in the great plague that decimated the people, so that, as a Tory writer says, "The difficulty of getting men to work on reason- able terms (i.e., at a price that left their employers a reasonable quantity of surplus-labour) grew to such a height as to be quite intolerable." 1 Reasonable wages were, therefore, fixed by law as well as the limits of the working-day. THE GENERAL LAW OP CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 651 1846 £58,842,377 1849 63,596,052 1856 115,826,948 1860 135,842,817 1865 165,862,402 1866 188,917, 563* After these few examples one understands the cry of triumph of the Registrar-General of the British people: "Rapidly as the population has increased, it has not kept pace with the progress of industry and wealth." 2 Let us turn now to the direct agents of this industry, or the pro- ducers of this wealth, to the working-class. 90 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION We have seen that the money-form is but the reflex, thrown upon one single commodity, of the value relations between all the rest. It is called the Factory. The ancient Assyr- ian, Egyptian, and other collections in London, and in other European capi- tals, make us eye-witnesses of the modes of carrying on that co-operative labour. They applied to the * flesh agents,' as they are called. The first metamorphosis of a commodity is visibly, not only the money's movement, but also that of the commodity itself; in the second metamorphosis, on the contrary, the movement appears to us as the movement of the money alone. "Le solstice est le moment de l'annee ou commence la crue du Nil, et celui que les Egyptiens ont du observer avec le plus d'attention . But so soon as the series of metamorphoses is in- terrupted, so soon as sales are not supplemented by subsequent purchases, money ceases to be mobilised; it is transformed, as Boisgiuillebensays, from "meuble" into "immeuble," from mov- able into immovable, from coin into money. Sickness and dyspepsia are pro- duced by the frequent breaking of the weft, when the weaver sucks the weft through the eye of the shuttle." On the other hand, the substitutes for flour were a Fortunatus' purse to the manu- facturers, by increasing the weight of the yarn. On the one hand, it spreads itself from its sources over all the markets of the world, in order to become absorbed, to various extents, into the different national spheres of circulation, to fill the conduits of currency, to replace abraded gold and silver coins, to supply the material of articles of luxury, and to petrify into hoards. 470 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION e. In order that the law of supply and demand may not be broken, these gentlemen draw their "labour-supply . . It therefore varies with the value of these means or with the quantity of labour requisite for their production. &c," p. Then another Act, The Mines' Inspecting Act of 1860, pro- vides that mines shall be inspected by public officers nominated specially for that purpose, and that boys between the ages of 10 and 12 years shall not be employed, unless they have a school certificate, or go to school for a certain number of hours. We, therefore, assume no more than what actually takes place. and E., in which no special details are given, include the incomes of employ- es, officers, State sinecurists> State fundholders, &c. M — C — M' is therefore in reality the general formula of cap- ital as it appears prima facie within the sphere of circulation. In this manner the labour realised in the values of commodities is presented not only under its negative aspect, under which abstraction is made from every concrete form and useful property of actual work, but its own positive nature is made to reveal itself expressly. Once the capitalist mode of production established and become general, the difference between absolute and relative surplus-value makes itself felt, whenever there is a question of raising the rate of sur- plus-value. One portion is consumed by the capitalist as revenue, 2 the other is employed as capital, is accumulated. 'Question: Has not the use of the power-loom su- perseded the use of the hand-loom? * 1. The use-value of commodities be- comes valueless, and their value vanishes in the presence of its own independent form. And when at last it becomes quite uninhabitable— unin- habitable even to the humblest standard of serfdom— it will be but one more destroyed cottage, and future poor-rates will be somewhat lightened. 1 [Note in the 4th German edition: I am inserting the parenthesis because its omission has often given rise to the misunderstanding that every product that is consumed by some one other than its producer is considered in Marx a commodity. His average wage expressed in pints of wheat was from 1770 to 1771, 90 pints, in Eden's time (1797) only 65, in 1808 but 60. The money functions now, first as a measure of value in the determi- nation of the price of the commodity sold; the price fixed by the contract measures the obligation of the debtor, or the sum of money that he has to pay at a fixed date. The forms A and B were fit only to express the value of a com- modity as something distinct from its use-value or material form. We see then that that which determines the magnitude of the value of any article is the amount of labour socially necessary, or the labour-time socially necessary for its production. 4,312,388 ts. The relative magnitude of the element of price, which represents the value of the means of production only, or the constant part of capital consumed, is in direct, the relative magnitude of the other element of price that pays labour (the variable part of capital) is in inverse proportion to the advance of accumulation. "By his own labour and that of his forefathers," answer unanimously the spokesmen of Po- litical Economy. 3 An example: The various mechanical apparatus introduced since the Act of 1844 into woollen mills, for replacing the labour of children. On the other hand, the advantages of further division are obtainable only by adding to the number of workmen, and this can be done only by adding multiples of the va- rious detail groups. Hence want of employment. Human labour-power in motion, or human labour, creates value, but is not itself value. c, Postscript, p. The rate of surplus- value, or the degree of exploitation of labour-power, and the value of labour-power, or the amount of necessary working-time being given, it is self-evident that the greater the variable capital, the greater would be the mass of the value produced and of the surplus- value. Senior, "the most frightful picture of avarice, selfishness and cruelty on the part of masters and of parents, and of juvenile and infantile misery, degradation and destruction ever presented.... The relative form and the equivalent form are two intimately connected, mutually dependent and inseparable elements of the expression of value; but, at the same time, are mutually exclusive, antagonistic extremes — i.e., poles of the same expression. clay, sand, &c. The amount of fixed capital employed in the production of a piece of British muslin is at least a hundred, probably a thousand times greater than that employed in a similar piece of Indian muslin. Even the mild, Free- trade, vulgar economist, Molinari, says: "Dans les colonies ou 1'esclavage a ete aboli sans que le travail force se trouvait remplace par une quantite equi- valente de travail libre, on a vu s'operer la contre-partfe du fait qui se realise tous les jours sous nos yeux. The Yankees have invented a stone-breaking machine. Amongst other things he says this: "An idle learning being little better than the learning of idle- ness . 2 "A principal cause of the increase of capital, during the war, proceeded from the greater exertions, and perhaps the greater privations of the labouring classes, the most numerous in every society. Absolute surplus-value is relative, since it makes necessary such a development of the productiveness of labour, as will allow of the necessary labour-time being confined to a portion of the working-day. But to preach slavery of the masses, in order that a few 1 F. The very nature of the circulation of commodi- ties begets the opposite appearance. No one made a greater outcry over "impossibilities" than our friends the earthenware manufacturers. The thinning-out of the independent, self-supporting peasants not only brought about the crowding together of the industrial proletariat, in the way that Geoffroy Saint Hilaire explained the condensation of cosmical matter at one place, by its rarefaction at another. . I worked two nights last week." Fernyhough, a boy often: "I have not always an hour (for dinner). 1864, pp. Landlord and tenant . When treating of the working-day, we saw that the labourer is often compelled to make his individual consumption a mere in- cident of production. But, as a matter of fact, sur- plus-value had a* that time, thanks to the increased intensity of labour, and to the prolongation of the working-day, increased both in absolute and relative magnitude. 1st Ed., London, 1707; 2nd Ed., London, 1745. He not only effects a change of form in the material on which he works, but he also realises a purpose of his own that gives the law to his modus operandi, and to which he must subordinate his will. Let the whole line a c, a b — c represent, for example, a working- day of 12 hours; the portion of a b 10 hours of necessary labour, and the portion b c 2 hours of surplus-labour. Besides the exertion of the bodily organs, the process demands that, during the whole operation, the workman's will be steadily in consonance with his purpose. 2 1. richesse en^productiohs, conver- ges en argent." (Mercier de la Riviere, 1. Since handicraft skill is the foundation of manufacture, and since the mechanism of manufacture as a whole possesses no framework, apart from the labourers themselves, capital is constantly com- pelled to wrestle with the insubordination of the workmen. He always gives 12 hours of labour. British soldiers enforced this eviction, and came to blows with the inhabitants. In the manufacturing period par excellence, the capitalist mode of production had become sufficiently strong to render legal regulation of wages as impracti- cable as it was unnecessary; but the ruling classes were unwilling in case of necessity to be without the weapons of the old arsenal. Misere de la Philosophie. [Added in the 4th German edition. Machinery, it is true, cheapens the nec- essaries of life, but it also cheapens the labourer." ("A Prize Essay on the Comparative Merits of Competition and Co-operation." London, 1834, p. To become a free seller of labour-power, who carries his commodity wherever he finds a market, he must further have escaped from the regime of the guilds, their rules for apprentices and jo*urney- men, and the impediments of their labour regulations. Each labourer produces only some part of a whole, and each part, having no value or utility in itself, there is nothing on which the labourer can seize, and say: It is my product, this 1 will keep to myself." ("Labour Defended against the Claims of Capital." Lond., 1825, p. used amounts to 15 lbs., which is con- verted, not into yarn, but into "devil's dust." Now, although this 15 lbs. Here, however, a task is set us, the perform- ance of which has never yet even been attempted by bourgeois economy, the task of tracing the genesis of this money-form, of same time the normal activity of living beings. but are left at liberty without interruption to pursue those callings which are suited to their various dispositions. III. 1 As regards the means of production, what is really consumed is their use-value, and the consumption of this use-value by labour results in the product. In its modern form, the power-loom has undergone essential alterations. "The nourishment ob- tained by the labourer himself," says Dr. E. 8.) 3 Belgium, the paradise of Continental Liberalism, shows no trace of this movement. "The hind with his 10s. Its existence is the result of a special sort of productive activity, the nature of which is determined by its aim, mode of operation, subject, means, and result. Before the revo- lution (1789), the minimum for the infantry in France was 165 centimetres; in 1818 (law of March 10th), 157; by the law of March 21, 1832, 156 c. 121, p. 4 The "spirit" of Protestantism may be seen from the following, among other things. In the "categoric" sense the farmer is an industrial capitalist as much as the manufacturer. On the contrary, the daily or weekly wages may rise, although the price of labour remains constant or even falls. In the Report of September, 1865, Dr. Bell, one of the poor law doctors of Bradford, ascribes the frightful mortality of fever-patients in his district to the na- ture of their dwellings. ... The produc- tion of surplus-value— in the form hitherto considered by us — by means of simple extension of the working-day, proved, therefore, to be independent of any change in the mode of production itself. The data were given him by an English manager until recently employed there. Not taking into account the great periodically recurring forms that the changing phases THE GENERAL LAW OP CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 641 of the industrial cycle impress on it, now an acute form during the crisis, then again a chronic form during dull times — it has always three forms, the floating, the latent, the stagnant. That the Kaffirs know what they are about is shown by the following: at the same time that the official British Health CAPITALIST PRODUCTION is far from having turned his goods into money, when he has ex- pressed their value in a price or in imaginary money, and that it does not require the least bit of real gold, to estimate in that metal millions of pounds' worth of goods. Anderson (not to be con- founded with James Anderson) in his "History of Commerce," believe in the direct intervention of Providence. The names of these foreign coins never coincide with those of the indigenous weights. 434 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION machine in place of the second carding, had considerably reduced the number of hands formerly employed in the carding-room." Another spinning-mill is estimated to effect a saving of labour of 10%. 1 1. Eskrigge acquitted Robinson, and now was of opinion that what was right for Robinson was fair for Eskrigge. 406-9, p. That form is x Commodity A = y Commodity B. MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 455 especially to India, surpass all former years; 1830 glutted markets, great distress; 1831 to 1833 continued depression, the monopoly of the trade with India and China withdrawn from the East India Company; 1834 great increase of factories and machinery, short- ness of hands. Their evidence is to be found in the appendix to the Factory Reports for the half-year endi ng October 1848. The product of one form of useful labour replaces that of another. A horseman does an incendiary a great service, by helping him to rob on the highway, and pillage land and houses. 7.) "Silver and gold, coined or uncoined, though they are used for a measure of all other things, are no less a commodity than wine, oil, tobacco, cloth, or stuffs." ("A Discourse concerning Trade, and that in particular of the East Indies," &c. 8 "Those were the very words used by the cotton manufacturers,' 1 I. The simple commodity-form is therefore the germ of the money- form. Consequently, we see, first, that the addition of new value takes place not by vir- tue of his labour being spinning in particular, or joineringin particular, but because it is labour in the abstract, a portion of the total labour of society; and we see next, that the value added is of a given definite amount, not because his labour has a special utility, but because it is exerted for a definite time. m., are not suitable. For it is the only country where artificers may not in any way med- dle with the affairs of another class of citizens, but must follow that calling alone which by law is hereditary in their clan.... for costs. The lynx eye of Capi- tal discovered that the Act of 1844 did not allow 5 hours' work before mid-day without a pause of at least 30 minutes for re- freshment, but prescribed nothing of the kind for work after mid- day. Just as little as the commodities that the capitalist buys with a part of the surplus-value for his own consumption, serve the purpose of production and of creation of value, so little is the labour that he buys for the satisfaction of his natural and social require- ments, productive labour. D., in "An Enquiry into the Causes of the Present High Price of Provisions," London, 1767; Dr. Price, and especially Postleth- wayt, as well in the supplement to his "Universal Dictionary of Trade and Commerce," as in his "Great Britain's Commercial Interest explained and improved." 2nd Edition, 1755. All is not service and benefit to a neighbour that is called service and benefit. The 390 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION it imparts to the product. of Insp. Other- wise, he would not bring it to the market. Thus, e.g., J. I used to cry with sore feet every night last winter." G. 2 "The first (natural wealth) as it is most noble and advantageous, so doth it make the people careless, proud, and given to all excesses; whereas the second enforceth vigilancy, literature, arts and policy." ("England's Treasure by Foreign Trade. But the mischiefs of the trade, in the metropolis especially, are that it is monopolised by some twenty-six capitalists, who, under the advan- tages that spring from capital, can bring in capital to force economy out of labour. The same quantity, 1 shilling or 2 hours, is added in one case and subtracted in the other. ed. But suppose his product turn out a real use-value, MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OF COMMODITIES 107 and thereby attracts money? Within a fortnight sev- eral of these persons were attacked, and in the course of a few weeks five out of the nine had fever, and one died". This relative increase in the value of the variable' capital, or the relative magnitude of the surplus- value, I call, "The rate of surplus-value." 1 We have seen that the labourer, during one portion of the labour-process, produces only the value of his labour-power, that is, the value of his means of subsistence. I., p. The wear and tear of all instruments, their daily loss of use-value, and the corresponding quantity of value they part with to the product, are accordingly calculated upon this basis. Tillie at Londonderry, which employs 1,000 operatives in the factory itself, and 9,000 people spread up and down the country and working in their own houses. 20-109 passim. Does an operative in a cotton-factory produce nothing but cotton goods? 4 The following few figures indicate the increase in the "factories" of the United Kingdom since 1848: 418 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION SECTION IV.— THE FACTORY At the commencement of this chapter we considered that which we may call the body of the factory, i.e., machinery or- ganised into a system. The growth of population here forms the mathematical limit to the production of surplus-value by the total social capital. 117) the English text has been altered in conformity with the 4th German edi- tion. 628 "centralisation move- ment") the English text has been altered in conformity with the 4th German edition.— Ed. THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 627 But if the relative extension and energy of the movement towards centralisation is determined, in a certain degree, by the magni- tude of capitalist wealth and superiority of economic mechanism already attained, progress in centralisation does not in any way depend upon a positive growth in the magnitude of social capital. It will suffice merely to refer to certain intermediate forms, in which surplus-labour is not extorted by direct compulsion from the producer, nor the producer himself yet formally subjected to capital. Les institutions de la feodalite sont des institutions artificielles, celles de la bour- geoisie sont des institutions naturelles. It cannot be prolonged beyond a certain point. Exploitation of the workman by the machine is therefore, with him, identical with exploitation of the machine by the workman. There are, besides, two other factors that enter into the determination of the value of labour-power. learning them the art and mystery of cotton spinning, so soon as they are declared by the surgeon fit and proper persons for that occupation. A man or a commu- nity is rich, a pearl or a diamond is valuable... 3 If the English Regis- trar-General, therefore, rightly remarks: "The increase of farm- ers and farm-labourers, since 1801, bears no kind of proportion . Use-values are only produced by capitalists, because, and in so far as, they are the material substratum, the depositories of exchange-value. Answer: "C'est ce qu'une chose vaut," and what is "prix"? Nevertheless, the value that he transfers from the cotton to the yarn is either one-sixth of what it was before the variation, or, as the case may be, six times as much as before, The same 202 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION result occurs when the value of the instruments of labour rises or falls, while their useful efficacy in the process remains unal- tered. 532 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION From formulae II. In a community, the produce of which in general takes the form of commodities, i.e., in a community of commodity producers, this qualitative difference between the useful forms of labour that are carried on independently by individual producers, each on their own account, develops into a complex system, a social division of labour. He advances one part of the agricultural stock, the landlord the other. At the same time the prices, wooing glances cast at money by commodities, define the limits of its convertibility, by pointing to its quantity. This is quite as characteristic of ancient classical society as Franklin's definition of man, as a tool-making animal, is characteristic of Yankeedom. His most celebrated saying, "On n'achete des produits qu'avec des produits" (1. The sources of the supply of these labour- powers to London are Scotland, the western agricultural dis- tricts of England, and Germany. This was a favourite cry of the cotton lords at the time they were first threatened with the Factory Acts. 43. But the meal-times consist of 1 hour for breakfast, ly hours for dinner, and — an hour for "noon-meate," i.e., exactly twice as much as under the factory acts now in force. 3 But if 1 "Silver and gold themselves (which we may call by the general name of bullion) are ... 52.) "To all intents and purposes, therefore, as an Act for any benevolent or educational purpose, it is a failure; since it can scarcely be called benevolent to permit, which is tantamount to compelling, women and children to work 14 hours a day with or without meals, as the case may be, and perhaps for longer hours than these, without limit as to age, without reference to sex, and without regard to the social habits of the families of the neighbourhood, in which such works (bleaching and dyeing) are situated." (Reports, &c, for 30th April, 1863, p. SECTION 4.— DIFFERENT FORMS OF THE RELATIVE SURPLUS-POPULATION. 1 At all events the Committee had directed the attention of the public to its "daily bread," and therefore to the baking trade. 2 Placing on one side the generally injurious influence of night- labour, 3 the duration of the process of production, unbroken 1 Children's Employment Commission. There are others who, though they 'neither toil nor spin,' can yet command the produce of in- dustry, but who owe their exemption from labour solely to civili- sation and order . The more extensive, finally, the lazarus-layers of the working- class, and the industrial reserve army, the greater is official pauperism. Hence, the application of machinery to the production of surplus-value implies a contradiction which is immanent in it, since of the two factors of the surplus-value created by a given amount of capital, one, the rate of surplus-value, cannot be increased, except by diminishing the other, the number of workmen. A writer of the 18th century, often quoted already, the author of the "Essay on Trade and Commerce," only betrays the innermost secret soul of English capitalism, when he declares the historic mission of England to be the forcing down of English wages to the level of the French and the Dutch. 2 "Rept. 1 The competition between hand-weaving and power-weaving in England, before the passing of the Poor Law of 1833, was prolonged by supplementing the wages, which had fallen considerably below the minimum, with parish relief. III., pp. If production be capitalistic in form, so, too, will be reproduc- tion. If we may take an example from outside the sphere of production of material objects, a schoolmaster is a productive labourer, when, in addition to bela- bouring the heads of his scholars, he works like a horse to enrich the school proprietor. Why cannot he get a price? m., after 6 p. There is no indul- gence, no forbearance for the sick, the feeble, the aged, for woman's weak- 236 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION But as soon as people, whose production still moves within the lower forms of slave-labour, corvee-labour, &c, are drawn into the whirlpool of an international market dominated by the capi- talistic mode of production, the sale of their products for export becoming their principal interest, the civilised horrors of over- work are grafted on the barbaric horrors of slavery, serfdom, &c. The theoretical part of this book, a kind of hand-book of Political Economy, is, consider- ing the time of its publication, original in some parts, e.g., on commercial crises. Experience shows that this reduction is constantly being made. Sanderson would have to pay part of the wages of the adult men out of their own pockets instead of by the night- work of the boys. of yarn, one-sixth of the gross product, with a value of £2,000 which will be realised by a sale. II., p. Time is therefore required for the completion of the se- ries. THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 615 prudence to relieve, but folly to cure. Doctor: It is all noblemen, gentlemen, and all other that live either by a stinted rent or stypend, or do not manure [cultivation] the ground, or doe occupy no buying and selling." 744 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION Thus they grew rich at the expense both of their labourers and their landlords. p. Here, on one side of Gaick, you have the new forest of Glenfeshie; and there on the other you have the new forest of Ardverikie. c, pp. It has been seen further that, even with a given magnitude of functioning capital, the labour- power, the science, and the land (by which are to be understood, economically, all conditions of labour furnished by Nature inde- pendently of man), embodied in it, form elastic powers of capi- tal, allowing it, within certain limits, a field of action independ- ent of its own magnitude. von Liebig: "Die Chemie in ihrer Anwendung auf Agrikultur und Physiologie, 1862," 7th Ed., vol. 1 Now in order to allow of these elements actually functioning as capital, the capitalist class requires additional labour. D. The 1 Children's Employment Commission, p. The necessary part of his working-day amounts to 6 hours, and is, there- fore, caeteris paribus, a given quantity. That quantity is conditioned by two circumstances: first the relations between debtors and creditors form a sort of chain, in such a way that A, when he receives money from his debtor B, straightway hands it over to G his creditor, and so on; the second circumstance is the length of the intervals between the different due-days of the obligations. The same change would have taken place, if A, without the formality of an exchange, had directly stolen the £10 from B. The condemnation of one part of the working-class to enforced idleness by the over-work of the other part, and the con- verse, becomes a means of enriching the individual capitalists, * and accelerates at the same time the production of the industrial reserve army on a scale corresponding with the advance of social accumulation. Otherwise the spinner would be found to spend more time in producing a pound of yarn than is socially necessary, in which case the excess of time would create neither value nor money. "The em- ployers avail themselves of the habitual irregularity in the home- work, when any extra work is wanted at a push, so that the work goes on till 11, and 12 p. Legislation was terrified at this revolution. 2 So long as trade is 1 From this we may judge of the absurdity of J. 17, I. Les des sont pipes. Aft- erwards he is controlled by others. The continuance of this relation demands that the owner of the labour-power should sell it only for a definite period, for if he were to sell it rump and stump, once for all, he would be selling himself, converting himself from a free man into a slave, from an owner of a commodity into a commodity. The production of relative surplus-population has more than kept pace with the absolute depopulation. 118-20. 8 (Senior, "Principes fondamentaux de l'ficon. In the construction of the cottages, only one point of view is of moment, 1 1. Bailey, who have occupied themselves with the analysis of the form of value, have been unable to arrive at any result, first, because they confuse the form of value with value itseli; and second, because, under the coarse influence of the practical bourgeois, they exclusively give their attention to the quantitative aspect oi the ques- tion. Stuttgart 1828, pp. His commodity possesses for himself no immediate use-value. So soon, however, as the factory system has gained a certain breadth of footing and a definite degree of maturity, and, especially, so soon as its technical ba- sis, machinery, is itself produced by machinery; so soon as coal mining and iron mining, the metal industries, and the means of transport have been revolutionised; so soon, in short, as the general conditions requisite for production by the modern indus- trial system have been established, this mode of production ac- quires an elasticity, a capacity for sudden extension by leaps and bounds that finds no hindrance except in the supply of raw mate- 1 "The sufferings of the hand-loom weavers were the subject of an in- quiry by a Royal Commission, but although their distress was acknowledged and lamented, the amelioration of their condition was left, and probably necessarily so, to the chances and changes of time, which it may now be hoped" [20 years later!] "have nearly obliterated those miseries, and not improbably by the present great extension of the power-loom." ("Rep. The same holds good when the repartition of the value produced is exclusively kept in sight. I return to this example in order to clear up an erroneous notion. In order to express the value of the linen as a congelation of human labour, that value must be expressed as having objective existence, as being a something materially different from the linen itself, and yet a something common to the linen and all other commodities. Or superfluous wealth that does not exist? National debts, i.e., the alienation of the state — whether despotic, constitutional or republican — marked with its stamp the capitalistic era. Juarez abolished peonage. Hence, apart from the radical changes introduced in the construction of sailing vessels, the means of communication and transport became grad- ually adapted to the modes of production of mechanical indus- try, by the creation of a system of river steamers, railways, ocean steamers, and telegraphs. While they got the same wages and gained one hour of spare time, the capitalist got the same amount produced and saved the cost of coal, gas, and other such 1 See "Rep. The religious reflex of the real world can, in any case, only then finally vanish, when the practical relations of every-day life offer to man none but perfectly intelligible and reasonable rela- tions with regard to his fellowmen and to Nature, 80 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION The life-process of society, which is based on the process of material production, does not strip off its mystical veil until it is treated as production by freely associated men, and is con- sciously regulated by them in accordance with a settled plan. But they all employ the power of the State, the concentrated and organ- ised force of society, to hasten, hothouse fashion, the process of transformation of the feudal mode of production into the capital- ist mode, and to shorten the transition. The sale and the purchase constitute one identical act, an exchange between a commodity- owner and an owner of money, between two persons as opposed to each other as the two poles of a magnet. Th. Thornton: "Over-population and its Remedy,'* Lond., 1846. But very soon an im- portant change takes place. Table B INCREASE OR DECREASE IN THE AREA UNDER CROPS AND GRASS IN ACREAGE Cereal Green Crops Grass and Flax Total Culti- Year Crops Clover vated Land De- De- In- De- In- De- In- De- In- crease crease crease crease crease crease crease crease crease Acres Acres Acres Acres Acres Acres Acres Acres Acres 1861 15,701 36,974 47,969 19,271 81,873 1862 72,734 74,785 6,623 2,055 138,841 1863 144,719 19,358 7,724 63,922 92,431 1864 122,437 2,317 47,486 87,761 10,493 1865 72,450 25,241 68,970 50,159 28,218 1861- 428,041 107,984 82,834 122,850 330,860 65 In the year 1865, 127,470 additional acres came under the heading "grass land," chiefly because the area under the head- ing of "bog and waste unoccupied," decreased by 101,543 acres. Newmarch, collaborator and editor of Tooke's "History of Prices." Is it a scientific advance to make cowardly concessions to public opinion? Although, therefore, the prodigality of the capitalist never pos- sesses the bona-fide character of the open-handed feudal lord's prodigality, but, on the contrary, has always lurking behind it the most sordid avarice and the most anxious calculation, yet his expenditure grows with his accumulation, without the one necessarily restricting the other. A - B — G. This is so because the value of the labour-power — sold for a definite length of time, say a day, a week, etc. 314.) The English Factory Inspector, Alexander Redgrave, in his Report of Oct. Wakefield in his edition of Adam Smith's "Wealth of Nations," vol. 2 "As one man cannot, and ten men must strain to lift a tou of weight, yet 100 men can do it only by the strength of a finger of each of them." (John Bellers: "Proposals for Raising a Golledge of Industry." London, 1696. 2 (3) The debasing 1 Moreover, it has not general historical validity. . Comm. "Such a spirit of 136 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION debtors, who lost their political power together with the economic basis on which it was established. The circumstance, however, that retorts and other vessels, are nec- essary to a chemical process, does not compel the chemist to no- tice them in the result of lys analysis. That which holds good of the means of subsistence holds with the raw materials of industry 1 In his "Notions de Philosophie Naturelle." Paris, 1838. 8.) 4 "A still greater boon is the distinction at last made clear between the worker's own time and his master's. c, p. The former receives the value of his commodity, whose use-value— labour — is thereby alienated to the buyer. Our analysis has shown, that the form or expression of the value of a commodity originates in the nature of value, and not that value and its magnitude originate in the mode of their ex- pression as exchange-value. 10 -^ d. 3. We then take various pieces of iron, whose weight has been determined beforehand. c, pp. In what country, except North America and some new colonies, do the wages of free labour employed in agriculture, much exceed a bare subsistence for the labourer? The occupation, instinctive almost as a portion of human art, unobjectionable as a branch of human industry, is made by mere excess of work, the destroyer of the man. When gold replaced silver as a measure of value, the same name was applied according to the ratio be- tween the values of silver and gold, to perhaps l-15th of a pound of gold. is the money expression for 24 hours of realised labour. I need scarcely add that many of these dwellings are dark, damp, dirty, stinking holes, utterly unfit for human habitations; they are the centres from which disease and death are distributed amongst those in better circumstances, who have allowed them thus to fester in our midst." 1 Bristol takes the third place after London in the misery of its dwellings. But accumulation, the gradual increase of capital by repro- duction as it passes from the circular to the spiral form, is clearly a very slow procedure compared with centralisation, which has 1 [Note in the 4th German edition. At the same time in public meetings and in petitions to Par- liament rose the cry of the London journeymen bakers against their over-work, &c. was size. Babbage. 73.) ABSOLUTE AND RELATIVE SURPLUS-VALUE 5l3 ible how little trouble and expense the bringing up of their children causes them. . Rent? The transaction is veiled by the commodity-form of the product and the money-form of the commodity. more and younger children are employed in them." (1. This is, however, only the legally prescribed corvee. By working, the latter becomes actually, what before he only was potentially, labour-power in action, a labourer. The circle in which simple reproduction moves, alters its form, and, to use Sismondi's expression, changes into a spiral. c, p. He is the recruiting- sergeant for the gang, which works under him, not under the farmer. after it was woven." 1 In the Report of Inspectors of Factories for 30th April, 1864, we read as follows: "The trade is availing itself of this resource at present to an extent which is even discreditable. Nevertheless, the money relation of debtor and creditor that existed at these two periods reflected only the deeper-lying antagonism between the general economic conditions of existence of the classes in question. They amount to the most serious damage to the mill-owner's prospects and proper- ty. W. — This excellent work, that was published anonymously, is by the Rev. The occupier is to hang up a "legible" printed notice stating the hours for the beginning and ending of work and the times allowed for the several meals. But over-time does exist for him, the prolongation of the working-day beyond the limits corresponding with the usual price of labour. there is no employment for them;" 4 and further, that during the active times they "are subject to broken days and to all kinds of interruptions." 5 These results of the agricultural revolution— i.e., the change of arable into pasture land, the use of machinery, the most rigo- rous economy of labour, &c, are still further aggravated by the model landlords, who, instead of spending their rents in other countries, condescend to live in Ireland on their demesnes. The total num- ber of moves made by all the circulating coins of one denomina- tion being given, we can arrive at the average number of moves made by a single coin of that denomination, or at the average velocity of the currency of money. 1 Circulation sweats money from every pore. . daily value of labour-power , , , , , the traction: tt^t-. 130-131.) 358 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION in some communities replaces the silversmith, in others the school- master. 2 Up to this point, however, we are acquainted only with one function of money, namely, to serva as the form of manifestation of the value of commodities, or as the material in which the magnitudes of their values are socially expressed. When one commodity replaces another, the money- commodity always sticks to the hands of some third person. 710.) "What is the general feeling in the district ... Everything becomes saleable and buyable. 53, n. Why don't you ask further, where are the independent weavers, spinners, and artisans gone? 55.) That such a question should furnish the mate- rial of serious controversy, shows plainly how capitalist production acts on the brain-functions of capitalists and their retainers. B. For the so- lution of this apparent contradiction, many intermediate terms are as yet wanted, as from the standpoint of elementary algebra many intermediate terms are wanted to understand that -y may represent an actual magnitude. "It is a melancholy thing to stand alone in one's country," said Lord Leicester, when complimented on the com- pletion of Hookham. A commodity, in its capacity of a use-value, satisfies a par- ticular want, and is a particular element of material wealth. 899.) 3 "Exchange confers no value at all upon products." (F. 2 It is not the tropics with their luxuriant vegetation, but the temperate zone, that is the mother-country of capital. THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 695 that children are generally only to be hired through his instru- mentality. Dr. W. B. 188, 189.) 2 "Ces speculatcurs si economes du travail des ouvriers qu'il faudrait qu'ils payassent." (J.N. Bidaut: "Du Monopole qui s'etablit dans les arts industriels et le commerce." Paris, 1828, p. These obstructions are vanishing day by day. 2 It is a result of the di- vision of labour in manufactures, that the labourer is brought face to face with the intellectual potencies of the material process of production, as the property of another, and as a ruling power. Nevertheless there are two circumstances whose influence is decisive. He therefore buys it before he pays for it. c, p. Hence, in determining the value of the yarn, or the labour- time required for its production, all the special processes carried on at various times and in different places, which were necessary, first to produce the cotton and the wasted portion of the spindle, and then with the cotton and spindle to spin the yarn, may to- gether be looked on as different and successive phases of one and the same process. had remained the legal "day," within the limits of which at first the 12, and later the 10 hours' labour of young persons and women had to be performed under the prescribed conditions. Thus the whole transaction would be reduced to a single act form- ing an isolated, non-complemented phase in the ordinary cir- culation of commodities, a mere sale from A's point of view, and from B's, a mere purchase. And my assertion that, in the first 5^- hours, 3 he produces his wages, and in the last 5^- hours your net profit, amounts only to this, that you pay him for the former, but not for the latter. There may be, e.g., originally 50 per cent, of a capital laid out in means of production, and 50 per cent, in labour-power; later on, with the development of the productivity of labour, 80 per cent, in means of production, 20 per cent, in labour-power, and so on. By means of his in- vention one negress was enabled to clean 100 lbs. and why we shall consider all those that refuse us this help as enemies of the reform oi labour and of the rights of the labourer." (Resolution of the Working Men ot Dun- kirk, New York State, 1866.) 2 Reports, &c, for Oct., 1848, p 112. Owen pre-supposes directly associated labour, a form of production that -is entirely inconsist- ent with the production of commodities. 3 "An Essay," &c, pp. £1,000,000 Total, . 1 Hith- 1 "Quando si perfezionano le arti, che non e altro che la scoperta di nuove vie, onde si possa compiere una manufattura con meno gente o (che e lo stesso) in minor tempo di prima." (Galiani, 1. Here the surplus- population exists in the floating form. You and I know on the market only one law, that of the exchange of com- modities. CAPITALIST PRODUCTION at its zenith. He says, with other things: "Depopulation and transforma- tion into sheep-walks were the most convenient means for getting an income without expenditure... Here, the commodities that take part in the process, do not count any longer as necessary adjuncts of labour-power in the production of a definite, useful object. We have seen, too, how this antagonism vents its rage in the creation of that monstrosity, an industrial reserve army, kept in misery in order to be always at the disposal of capital; in the incessant hu- man sacrifices from among the working-class, in the most reckless squandering of labour-power, and in the devastation caused by a social anarchy which turns every economic progress into a social calamity. Year ending April 5th, 1865. Fawcett, I. 2 In a thoroughly brutal way about 10 years after Ortes, the Church of England parson, Townsend, glorified misery as a necessary condition of wealth. The Italians, on the other hand, were always decreasing in number, destroyed as they were by poverty, taxes, and military service. It is certain, too, that all those things only represent the labour which has created them, and if they have a value, or even two distinct values, they can only derive them from that (the value) of the labour from which they emanate." (Ricar- do. The same result may be arrived at in the following way. But here again, the change in value originates outside the process in which the machine is acting as a means of production. 1 But it is moreover self-evi- dent that the difference of form in the payment of wages alters in no way their essential nature, although the one form may be more fa- vourable to the development of capitalist production than the other. m. An exact analysis of the process, there- fore, demands that we should, for a time, disregard all phenomena that hide the play of its inner mechanism. This is not the case on the universal market, whose integral parts are the indi- vidual countries. 286 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION placed under a ban, under a virtual law of suspects. "A young woman having fever, lay at night in a room occupied by her father and mother, her bastard child, two young men (her brothers), and her two sisters, each with a bastard child— 10 per- sons in all. The evidence proves that boys and girls very often work over-time, which, not unfrequently, extends to 24 or even 36 hours of uninterrupted toil. x 1 The above data, which may be relied upon, were given me by a Man- chester spinner. . All the relations between Robinson and the objects that form this wealth of his own creation, are here so simple and clear as to be intelligible without exertion, even to Mr. Sedley Taylor. Of the Prussian operative he says: "He receives a remuneration sufficient to procure the simple fare, and to supply the slender comforts to which he has been accustomed ... (504 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION General result: by incorporating with itself the two primary creators of wealth, labour-power and the land, capital acquires a power of expansion that permits it to augment the elements of its accumulation beyond the limits apparently fixed by its own magnitude, or by the value and the mass of the means of produc- tion, already produced, in which it has its being. . . m., till 5 and 6 o'clock p. On the discovery of money, barter of neces- sity developed into xotTirjUxT), into trading in commodities, and this again, in opposition to its original tendency, grew into Chrematistic, into the art of making money. Several did not contain an atom of morphia. 3 Wherever the nature of the process did not in- volve production on a large scale, the new industries that have sprung up in the last few decades, such as envelope making, steel- pen making, &c, have, as a general rule, first passed through the handicraft stage, and then the manufacturing stage, as short phases of transition to the factory stage. The colossal effects of simple co-operation are to be seen in the gigantic structures of the ancient Asiatics, Egyptians, Etrus- cans, &c. . 1 the Factory Act of 1850 now in force (1867) allows for the average working-day 10 hours, i.e., for the first 5 days 12 hours from 6 a. 1, p. "The command of quantity ... As the co- operative character of the labour-process becomes more and more marked, so, as a necessary consequence, does our notion of pro- ductive labour, and of its agent the productive labourer, become extended. In England this legislation began under Henry VII. "Its plaster walls bulged very like a lady's dress in a curtsey. c, p. In dress- making, for instance, where the labour for the most part was al- ready organised, chiefly by simple co-operation, the sewing-machine at first formed merely a new factor in that manufacturing industry. Several attempts to procure them em- ployment elsewhere, were rendered of no avail by their ignorance and brutality, and by their mental and bodily degradation. If they are to be treated as direct expressions of the degree of self-expansion of capital, the following erroneous law would hold good: Sur- plus-labour or surplus-value can never reach 100%. On entering that process, they become incorporated with capital. The chief part of the products is destined for direct use by the communi- ty itself, and does not take the form of a commodity. 248, 249.) 1 The mandarin Wan-mao-in, the Chinese Chancellor of the Exchequer, took it into his head one day to lay before the Son of Heaven a proposal that secretly aimed at converting the asstgnats of the empire into convert- ible bank-notes. 130 Reports, &c, I. (David Urquhart, 1. and this for six months. Some of the capital that was previously de- voted to production of necessary means of subsistence, has to be- come reproduced in another form. 482 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION strikingly shows that the capitalist mode of production, owing to its very nature, excludes all rational improvement beyond a certain point. About the middle of the 16th century the proportion was changed of 2 acres of pasture to 2, later on, of 2 acres of pasture to one of arable, until at last the just proportion of 3 acres of pasture to one of arable land was attained." In the 19th century, the very memory of the connexion between the agricultural labourer and the communal property had, of course, vanished. And that is — human labour. During this century far more than £200,000,000 has been coined in India. the former statute is repeated, but strength- ened with new clauses. In formulating this law, Ricardo overlooked one circumstance; although a change in the magnitude of the surplus-value or sur- plus-labour causes a change in the opposite direction in the magni- tude of the value of labour-power, or in the quantity of necessary labour, it by no means follows that they vary in the same propor- tion. There thus remains only a single balance to pay. 159: "The nominal price of day-labour is at present no more than about four times, or, at most, five times higher than it was in the year 1514. The frequent repetition of the displacement of the same coins reflects not only the series of metamorphoses that a single commodity has gone through, but also the intertwining of the innumerable metamorphoses in the world of commodities in general. To the purchaser of a commodity belongs its use, and the seller of labour-power, by giving his labour, does no more, in reality, than part with the use-value that he has sold. Under these circum- stances, therefore, no change can take place in the absolute mag- nitude, either of the surplus- value, or of the value of labour-power, CHANGES OF MAGNITUDE 521 without a simultaneous change in their relative magnitudes, i.e., relatively to each other. Et ne quis possit emere aut vendere, nisi qui habet characterem aut nomen bestise, ^ut nume- rum nominis ejus." (Apocalypse.) Money is a crystal formed of necessity in the course of the exchanges, whereby different products of labour are practically equated to one another and thus by practice converted into com- modities. We shall return to the later proposals of the same Commission, which threatened to deprive of their "freedom" all the important branches of English Industry, with the exception of agriculture, mines, and the means of trans- port. The work is therefore re-distributed. 3 Still, this was not enough. A large part of the national product, changed later into a fund of capitalist accumulation, then still entered into the consumption- fund of the labourer. Capital further developed into a coercive relation, which compels the working-class to do more work than the narrow round of its own life-wants prescribes. Meanwhile, after a hearty laugh, he re-assumes his usual mien. 3 Thus, among others, Philanthropist Ashworth to .Leonard Horner, in a disgusting Quaker letter. General Rule: The value of the capital advanced divided by the surplus-value annually consumed, gives the number of years, or reproduction periods, at the expira- tion of which the capital originally advanced has been consumed by the capitalist and has disappeared. The difference in the rates of increase is due to the migration from country to town. [110J111). The use of one and the same technical term in different senses is inconvenient, but in no science can it be altogether avoided. Consequently the tension and the amount of labour-power expended become monstrous, and especially so in the case of the children who are condemned to this torture. Now, a terrible reaction set in, that even at this hour (the end of March, 1867) continues in this and other London industries. Therefore things tljat are relatively 1 "If silver never exceed what is wanted tor the smaller payments, it cannot be collected in sufficient quantities ioi the larger payments ... c, p. s.d. s.d. s.d. 2 4 8 — 8 2 6 1 6 3 5 8 — 8 1 6 6 6 1 3 1 /, 2 4 8 — 8 1 7 1 9 2 4 8 — 8 1 7 1 9 6 8 7 l/-,l/6, 10 6 2 8 6 i o»; 4 3 5 7 1/-.2/- 7 1 4 5 8 l IV, SECOND VILLAGE s. In our example above, 24 pieces were produced in 12 hours, whilst the value of the product of the 12 hours was 6s., the daily value of the labour-power 3s , the price of the labour- hour 3d., and the wage for one piece 1-^-d. All other conditions remaining the same, the surplus- 3 3 labour will fall from 5 -7- hours to 4 — hours, a period that still 14 gives a very profitable rate of surplus-value, namely 82-^-%. 30. . 2 What were the consequences for the Irish labourers left behind and freed from the surplus-population? On the other hand, if we look at the workshop as a whole, we see the raw material in all the stages of its produc- tion at the same time. The consequence of this is that large quantities of the crop are left unpicked, while another portion is gathered from the ground when it has fallen, and is of course discoloured and partially rotted, so that for want of labour at the proper season the culti- vator is actually forced to submit to the loss of a large part of that crop for which England is so anxiously looking." ("Bengal Hurkaru." Bi-Monthly Overland Summary of News, 22nd July, 1861.) CO-OPERATION 329 tion of arena simultaneous with, and arising from, extension of scale, whereby a number of useless expenses are cut down, is owing to the conglomeration of labourers, to the aggregation of various processes, and to the concentration of the means of production. 69.) This same Parry, however, complains that the English labourer is now (1815) in a much worse condition than in Eden's time (1797). He can increase the value of his commodity, by adding fresh labour, and therefore more value to the value in hand, by making, for instance, leather into boots. I, 1. Males 45,155 44,446 Females 52,459 52,955 97.614 97,401 Dr. Hunter's Report in "Public Health, Seventh Report. c, p 35. Whoever eats up, robs, and steals the nourishment of another, that man commits as greata murder (so far as in him CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO CAPITAL 593 But original sin is at work everywhere. m. Such improvements as the apparatus that stops a drawing frame, whenever a sliver breaks, and the self-acting stop, that stops the power-loom so soon as the shuttle bobbin is emptied of weft, are quite modern inventions. HO CAPITALIST PRODUCTION G — M (linen — money), which is the first phase of G — M — C (linen — money — Bible), is also M — C (money — linen), the last phase of another movement C — M — C (wheat — money — linen). Supposons qu'il n'y ait qu'une seule denree, ou marchandise dans le monde, ou qu'il n'y ait qu'une seule qui s'achete, et qu' eile se divise comme l'argent: Cette partie de cette marchandise repondra a une partie de la masse de l'argent; la moitie du total de l'une a la moilie du total de l'autre, &c. But the Mayor being apprehensive that this invention might throw a large number of workmen on the streets, caused the inventor to be secretly strangled or drowned." In Leyden, this machine was not used till 1629; there the riots of the ribbon-weavers at length compelled the Town Council to prohibit it. 54 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION for the production of a coat becomes doubled, we have instead of 20 yards of linen =1 coat, 20 yards of linen =^2 coat. Thus in the old- est caves we find stone implements and weapons. As late a? I., pp. can be worked more than 11 y hours a day, that is, 12 hours for 5 days in the week, and nine on Saturday. 4.) 2 "L'oro e l'argento hanno valore come metalli anteriore all'esser mo- neta." (Galiani, 1. It is under the form of money that value begins and ends, and begins again, every act of its own spontaneous generation. We had, therefore, to assume that this occurs during the transition from handicraft to capitalistic industry. But when surplus-value has to be pro- duced by the conversion of necessary labour into surplus-labour, it by no means suffices for capital to take over the labour-process in the form under which it has been historically handed down, and then simply to prolong the duration of that process. The work of these 200 people for half an hour a day is equal to one person's work for 50 hours, or 5 / 6 of one person's labour in a week, and is a positive gain to the employ- er." ("Reports of Insp. Every history of religion even, that fails to take account of this material basis, is uncritical. We see, then, all that our analysis of the value of commod- ities has already told us, is told us by the linen itself, so soon as it comes into communication with another commodity, the coat. But it forms at the same time a self-reproducing and self- perpetuating element of the working-class, taking a proportionally greater part in the general increase of that class than the other elements. But, no doubt, Herr Wil- helm Roscher, by "primitive forest" means his native heath of Luneburg. 1 "It is a very notable thing, too, that where long hours are the rule, small wages are also so." ("Report of Insp. Production and circulation of commodities can take place, although the great mass of the objects produced are intended for the immediate requirements of their producers, are not turned into commodities, and consequently social produc- tion is not yet by a long way dominated in its length and breadth by exchange-value. vol.,— Meitzen, "Der Boden des preussischen Staats."— Hanssen, "Leibeigen- schaft in Schleswig-Holstein."— F. 2 This incessant reproduction, this perpetuation of the labourer, is the sine qua non of capitalist production. 2 In a crisis, the antithesis between com- modities and their value-form, money, becomes heightened into an absolute contradiction. 96.) 2 Benjamin Franklin: Works, Vol. The character of having value, when once impressed upon products, obtains fixity- only by reason of their acting and re-acting upon each other as quantities of value. While the labourer is at work, his labour constantly under- goes a transformation: from being motion, it becomes an object without motion; from being the labourer working, it becomes the thing produced. 4 On the motion of Mr. Gladstone, the House of Commons or- dered, on the 17th February, 1867, a return of the total quanti- ties of grain, corn, and flour, of all sorts, imported into, and exported from, the United Kingdom, between the years 1831 and 1866. 1 No doubt, 1 Goni. 2 "They especially objected to work beyond the 12 hours per day, because the law which fixed those hours, is the only good which remains to 'them of the legislation of the Republic." ("Rep. We have nothing to do with these in detail; we simply add them together, and the sum is a surplus-value of £3 lis. Then the Bible falls out of circulation, and again money takes its place. E}ut the condition of child-labour, even at the end of the 17th century, is seen from the following complaint: '"Tis not their practice (in Germany) as with us in this king- dom, to bind an apprentice for seven years; three or four is their common standard: and the reason is, because they are educated from their cradle to something of employment, which renders them the more apt and docile, and consequently the more capable of attaining to a ripeness and quicker proficiency in business. . He falls into the ranks- of the supernumeraries, or is thrust down from a higher to a lower step in the scale. . Accordingly, Messrs. In those letters this passage occurs: "Capital must be rescued not only from labour, but from itself, and that will be best effected, by treating the acts of the industrial capitalist as economic and political functions, that have been delegated to him with his capital, and by treating his profit as a form of salary, because we still know no other social organisation. "The great evil of the factory system as at present con- ducted," says the first report of the Central Board of the Com- mission of June 28th, 1833, "has appeared to us to be that it en- tails the necessity of continuing the labour of children to the utmost length of that of the adults. Reponse a la Philosophic de la Misere par M. 6d., or 3s. sellers not enriched ... m. If his capacity for labour remains unsold, the labourer derives no benefit from it, but rather he will feel it to be a cruel nature-imposed necessity that this capacity has cost for its pro- duction a definite amount of the means of subsistence and that it will continue to do so for its reproduction. A product, though ready for immediate consumption, may yet serve as raw material for a further product, as grapes when they become the raw material for wine. The division of labour converts the product of labour into a commodity, and thereby makes necessary its further conversion into money. m. This is therefore the price of the 20 lbs. The higher the rent, the greater the number that must work together to pay it. 2 "Both in Staffordshire and in South Wales young girls and women are employed on the pit banks and on the coke heaps, not only by day but also by night. On the one hand, therefore, with the progress of accumula- tion, a larger variable capital sets more labour in action without enlisting more labourers; on the other, a variable capital of the same magnitude sets in action more labour with the same mass of labour-power; and finally, a greater number of inferior labour- powers by displacement of higher. It did not yet stand on that height of civilisation where the "wealth of the na- tion" (i.e., the formation of capital, and the reckless exploita- tion and impoverishing of the mass of the people) figure as the ultima Thule of all state-craft. At the end of the 17th and the beginning oi the 18th centuries the factors (agents) that crowded into every possible trade were still denounced as "public nuisances." Thus the Grand Jury at the quar- ter session of the Justices of the Peace for the County of Somerset, addressed a presentment to the Lower House which, among other things, states, "that these factors of Blackwell Hall are a Public Nuisance and Prejudice to the Clothing Trade, and ought to be put down as a Nuisance." "The Case of our English Wool., &c," London, 1685, pp. But in the colonies! Wake- field tells an extremely doleful anecdote. 2 1 "Since the general introduction of machinery, human nature has been forced far beyond its average strength. If, e.g., the working-day is 10 hours, and the daily val- ue of labour-power 3 shillings, the price of one working-hour is 3 3 -3-d. As was shown by an official medical inquiry in the year 1861, the high death-rates are, apart from local causes, principally due to the employment of the mothers away from their homes, and to the neglect and maltreatment, consequent on her absence, such as, amongst others, insufficient nourishment, unsuitable food, and dosing with opiates; besides this, there arises an unnatural estrangement between mother and child, and as a consequence intentional starving and poisoning of the children. But the inquiry showed the very opposite, namely, that the same cause which drove away malaria, the conversion of the land, from a morass in winter and a scanty pasture in summer, into fruitful corn land, created the exceptional death-rate of the infants. They take the shape, in the transactions of society, of services in kind and payments in kind. 2 Everything is just as it was. E.) 238 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION landlord, besides a mass of detailed payments in kind: (1), 12 days of general labour; (2), one day of field labour; (3), one day of wood carrying. The following is a particularly successful receipt of this wonderful philosopher: "5 lbs. c, pp. Thus, for instance, the various original types of Roman and Teutonic private property are deducible from differ- ent forms of Indian common property." (Karl Marx, "Zur Kritik, &c," P- 10.) COMMODITIES 79 by his labour-time. * Leaving out of consideration such ready-made means of subsistence as fruits, in gathering which a man's own limbs serve as the instruments of his labour, the first thing of which the labourer possesses himself is not the sub- ject of labour but its instrument. Gomm.: "He would sign any petition for it" (legislative interference). to 12s. L. of yarn, is represented by 13 -^ lbs. We shall, therefore, notice, and that briefly, but two important cases. Gamier. As the production of commodities further develops, every producer of commodities is compelled to make sure of the nexus rerum or the social pledge. In the text Senior converts the last 2/23 of the product into portions of the working-day itself. The first step made by an object of util- ity towards acquiring exchange-value is when it forms a non-use- value for its owner, and that happens when it forms a superfluous portion of some article required for his immediate wants. The country labourer and his family who had often, in a way truly wonderful, preserved, under the foulest conditions, a thoroughness and purity of character, go, in these, utterly to the devil. Most of the accidents from them happen to little children, from their creeping under the 422 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION to its extreme simplicity, it allows of a rapid and constant change of the individuals burdened with this drudgery. c, p. The labour which cre- ates Use-Value, and counts qualitatively is Work, as distinguished from Labour; that which creates Value and counts quantitatively, is Labour as distinguished from Work. 'Nothing have they done, sir,' said the woman, pointing to her boys, 'for six and twenty weeks; and all our money gone — all the twenty pounds that me and father saved when times were better, thinking g70 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION it would yield a little to keep us when we got past work. 2 In winter, work was to last from 5 in the morning until dark, with the same intervals. Once given the general basis of the capitalistic system, then, in the course of accumulation, a point is reached at which the development of the productivity of social labour becomes the most powerful lever of accumulation. The same state of things went on quietly until "the Swing riots, in 1830, revealed to us (i.e., the ruling classes) by the light of blazing corn-stacks, that misery and black mutinous discontent smouldered quite as fiercely under the surface of agricultural as of manufacturing England." 3 At this time, Sad- ler, in the House of Commons, christened the agricultural labour- ers "white slaves," and a Bishop echoed the epithet in the Upper House. However, he was at last told they would give him another quarter, i.e., 10 d.," I. In spite of the variety of his work, he knows that his labour, whatever its form, is but the activity of one and the same Robinson, and consequently, that it consists of nothing but different modes of human labour. With a given rate of surplus-value, and a given value of la- bour-power, therefore, the masses of surplus-value produced vary directly as the amounts of the variable capitals advanced. COMMODITIES SECTION 1.— THE TWO FACTORS OF A COMMODITY: USE-VALUE AND VALUE (THE SUBSTANCE OF VALUE AND THE MAGNITUDE OF VALUE) The wealth of those societies in which the capitalist mode of production prevails, presents itself as "an immense accumula- tion of commodities," 1 its unit being a single commodity. The effect of every possible combination may be found by treating each factor in turn as variable, and the other two constant for the time being. It is essentially the command over unpaid labour. An example of the waggish way in 1 1. Burke's Pamphlet on the ducal house of Bedford, whose offshoot was Lord John Russell, the "tomtit of Liberalism." 2 "The farmers forbid cottagers to keep any living creatures besides themselves and children, under the pretence that if they keep any beasts or poultry, they will steal from the farmers' barns for their support; they also say, keep the cottagers poor and you will keep them industrious, &c, but the real fact, I believe, is that the farmers may have the whole right of common to themselves." ("A Political Inquiry into the Consequences of Enclosing Waste Lands." London, 1785, p. When the revolution of the world-market, about the end of the 15th century, annihilated Northern Italy's commercial supremacy, a movement in the reverse direction set in. It was originally £500 and becomes £590. On the one hand, it arises from the union of various independent handicrafts, which become stripped of their independence and specialised to such an extent as to be re- duced to mere supplementary partial processes in the production of one particular commodity. c, pp. And this is the way in which, for many years, it has been actually operating in this kingdom." 3 He sums up the effect of the enclosures thus: "Upon the whole, the circumstances of the lower ranks of men are altered in almost every respect for the worse. In April 1866, 18 years after the publication of the work of Robert Somers quoted above, Professor Leone Levi gave a lec- ture before the Society of Arts on the transformation of sheep-walks into deer-forest, in which he depicts the advance in the devastation of the Scot- tish Highlands. Capital eschews no profit, or very small profit, just as Nature was formerly said to abhor a vacuum. The longer the life of the machine, the greater is the mass of the prod- ucts over which the value transmitted by the machine is spread, and the less is the portion of that value added to each single com- modity. Be- tween 1815 and 1830 the competition with the continent of Europe and with the United States sets in. 2 "The employer .... COMMODITIES 71 SECTION 4.— THE FETISHISM OF COMMODITIES AND THE SECRET THEREOF A commodity appears, at first sight, a very trivial thing, and easily understood. 2 Gladstone's next Budget speech of April 7th, 1864, is a Pindaric dithyrambus on the advance of surplus-value-making and the happiness of the people "tempered by poverty." He speaks of masses "on the bor- der" of pauperism, of branches of trade in which "wages have not increased," and finally sums up the happiness of the working- class in the words: "human life is but, in nine cases out of ten, a struggle for existence."* Professor Fawcett, not bound like Gladstone by official considerations, declares roundly: "I do not, of course, deny that money wages have been augmented by this increase of capital (in the last ten years), but this apparent advan- tage is to a great extent lost, because many of the necessaries of life are becoming dearer" (he believes because of the fall in value of the precious metals). 37. c, p. m. 2 Manufacture, in fact, produces the skill of the detail labourer, by reproducing, and systematically driving to an extreme within the workshop, the naturally developed differentiation of trades, which it found ready to hand in society at large. In the parishes of Fingringhoe, South Farnbridge, Widford, Basilden, and Ramsden Crags, in 1851, 1,392 persons were living on 8,449 acres in 316 houses; in 1861, on the same area, 1,473 persons in 249 houses. Only consider the course of events. c, Lecture ILL) 322 CHAPTER XIII CO-OPERATION Capitalist production only then really begins, as we have alrea- dy seen, when each individual capital employs simultaneously a comparatively large number of labourers; when consequently the labour-process is carried on on an extensive scale and yields, rel- atively, large quantities of products. Exchange does not create the differences between the spheres of production, but brings what are already different into relation, and thus con- verts them into more or less inter-dependent branches of the collec- tive production of an enlarged society. But, whatever its motive, the consequences remain the same. m. Comm. 120. This Fetishism of commodities has its origin, as the foregoing analysis has already shown, in the peculiar social character of the labour that produces them. "On the Economy of Machinery," 1st ed. On this there are not two opin- ions, even among the bourgeois economists. c, Voi I., i. qui s'etablit dans la plupart des manufactures et des ateliers." (Skarbek, 1. 239.) 2 "L'echange qui se fait de deux valeurs egales n'augmente ni ne dimi- nue la masse des valeurs subsistantes dans la societe. Smith does. The sale of labour-power, as will be remembered, takes place for a definite period of time. It establishes an accumulation of misery, corre- sponding with accumulation of capital. 149. This machine, which shook Europe to its foundations, was in fact the precursor of the mule and the power-loom, and of the industrial revolution of the 18th century. 38. "The Prussian factory operative labours at least ten hours per week more than his English competitor, and if employed at his own loom in his own house, his labour is not restricted to even those additional hours." ("Rep. Mr. Potter talks of the trade reviving 'in one, two, or three years,' and he asks us not 'to encourage or allow (!) the work- SIMPLE REPRODUCTION 577 ing power to emigrate.' He says that it is very natural the workers should wish to emigrate; but he thinks that in spite of their de- sire, the nation ought to keep this half million of workers with their 700,000 dependents, shut up in the cotton districts; and as a necessary consequence, he must of course think that the nation ought to keep down their discontent by force, and sustain them by alms — and upon the chance that the cotton masters may some day want them. c. We cannot tell from the mere look of a piece of money, for what particular com- modity it has been exchanged. If we abstract from the material substance of the circulation of commodities, that is, from the exchange of the various use- values, and consider only the economic forms produced by this process of circulation, we find its final result to be money: this final product of the circulation of commodities is the first form in which capital appears. The dyes, too, were chiefly extracted by the women from trees, shrubs and herbs." (Dugald Stewart's "Works," Ham- ilton's Ed., Vol. They were displaced by slaves. m. Accostare e separare sono gli unici elementi che l'ingegno umano ritrova analizzando l'idea della riproduzione: e tanto e riproduzione di valore (value in use, although Verri in this passage of his controversy with the Physiocrats is not himself quite certain of the kind of value he is speaking of) e di ricchezze se la terra, l'aria e l'acqua ne' campi si trasmutino in grano. With the carpets in the form of money, they bought means of subsistence to the value of £1,500. en B o a (~ S o c CO CO a; ■O bi CO 00 0) J tl) CO, 03 •a 73 <o . Engels, 1. For instance, Bruckner, "Theorie du Systeme animal," Leyde, 1767, in which the whole subject of the modern population theory is THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 617 Under the conditions of accumulation supposed thus far, which conditions are those most favourable to the labourers, their relation of dependence upon capital takes on a form endur- able, or, as Eden says: "easy and liberal." Instead of becoming more intensive with the growth of capital, this relation of dependence exhausted, and to which the passing quarrel between Quesnay and his pu- pil, the elder Mirabeau, furnished ideas on the same topic; then Parson Wallace, Parson Townsend, Parson Malthus and his pupil, the arch- Parson Thomas Chalmers, to say nothing of lesser reverend scrib- blers in this line. In the London exhibition of 1862, 1 From the standpoint of division of labour in Manufacture, weaving was not simple, but, on the contrary, complicated manual labour; and con- sequently the power-loom is a machine that does very complicated work. The increase of the difference between constant and variable capi- tal, is, therefore, much less than that of the difference between the mass of the means of production into which the constant, and the mass of the labour-power into which the variable, capital is converted. And the first birthright of capital is equal exploitation of labour-power by all capitalists. c, p. Instead of the protec- tion against French importation, the absence of protection to English fac- tory children now serves their turn. Manufacture takes its rise in two ways: — (1.) By the assemblage, in one workshop under the control of a single capitalist, of labourers belonging to various independent handicrafts, but through whose hands a given article must pass on its way to completion. This gives 307,058 "supernu- merary" farmers, and reckoning the families the low average of 4 persons, 1,228,232 persons. Often 1,000,000 grammes of quartz barely yield 1-3 and very seldom 30-60 grammes of gold. He will remember that the diet of a great part of the agricultural labourers' families is below the minimum necessary "to arrest starvation diseases." This is especially the case in all the purely rural districts of Cornwall, Devon, Somerset, Wilts, Stafford, Oxford, Berks, and Herts. The particular functions of money which it performs, either as the mere equivalent of commodities, or as means of circulation, or means of payment, as hoard or as universal money, point, accord- ing to the extent and relative preponderance of the one function or the other, to very different stages in the process of social produc- tion. He vanishes from the labour-market, but not into the workhouse. If, on the other hand, the subject of labour has, so to say, been filtered through previous labour, we call it raw material; such is ore already extracted and ready for washing. c, p. 1 11 Bower Street, No. 41 ... At the same time the progress of accumulation increases the material amenable to centralisation, i.e., the individual capitals, whilst the expan- sion of capitalist production creates, on the one hand, the social want, and, on the other, the technical means necessary for those immense industrial undertakings which require a previous central- isation of capital for their accomplishment. What effect was produced on their contemporaries by the sudden uprising of this brood of bankocrats, financiers, rentiers, brokers, stock-jobbers, &c, is proved by the writings of that time, e.g., by Bolingbroke's. Apply- ing this to man, he that would criticise all human acts, movements, rela- tions, etc., by the principle of utility, must first deal with human nature in general, and then with human nature as modified in each historical epoch. Along with the extension of circulation, increases the power of money, that absolutely social form of wealth ever ready for use. So it is in the world of commodities with the products of men's hands. . . He must begin by taking the la- bour-power as he finds it in the market, and consequently be sat- isfied with labour of such a kind as would be found in the period immediately preceding the rise of capitalists. a-head per week." (Report of the Inspector of Factories for 30th April, 1860, p 27.) Mr Redgrave forgets to tell us how the labourer himself can do all this for his children out of their 4s. The very improvement of the machinery demands to a certain extent "improved construction of the buildings," and this is an advantage to the workpeople. 163.) 4 "The only productive consumption, properly so called, is the con- sumption or destruction of wealth" (he alludes to the means of production) "by capitalists with a view to reproduction.... As the use of machinery becomes more general in a partic- ular industry, the social value of the product sinks down to its individual value, and the law that surplus-value does not arise from the labour-power that has been replaced by the machinery, but from the labour-power actually employed in working with the machinery, asserts itself. Thus spinning by machin- ery made weaving by machinery a necessity, and both togeth- er made the mechanical and chemical revolution that took place in bleaching, printing, and dyeing, imperative. At English instigation and for English pay they were tomahawked by red-skins. . The local ratepay- ers themselves are driven by the parochial charges to the verge of pauperism,"--- (S tandard, 5th April, 1867.) THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 671 As it is the fashion amongst English capitalists to quote Belgium as the Paradise of the labourer because "freedom of labour," or what is the same thing, "freedom of capital," is there limited neither by the despotism of Trades' Unions, nor by Fac- tory Acts, a word or two on the "happiness" of the Belgian labour- er. 62. The earth itself is an instrument of labour, but when used as such in agriculture implies a whole series of other instruments and a comparatively high development of la- bour. 1 13 Wymer Street, No. 19 . The latter aspect will not be considered until we come to the third book, to which, with the object of treating them in their proper connexion, we also relegate many other points that relate to the present question. B. My wife gets up and goes along with me. Thiers here confounds the spinning machine with the power-loom, "a fact, however, that touches us but little." MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 443 cloth have been produced on power-looms by fewer weavers than could weave 100,000 yards by hand. siecle ," p. of linen =one coat, already contains this antagonism, without as yet fixing it. 1856.— 1 in 15. It is, of course, just as absurd to hold the Teutonic-Chris- tian form of the family to be absolute and final as it would be to apply that character to the ancient Roman, the ancient Greek, or the Eastern forms which, moreover, taken together form a series in historical development. In 1854 the total sum of the exports and imports of the United Kingdom was £268,210,145; in 1865, £489,923,285. 124, p. But salaries may be regulated, and may also be reduced if they take too much from wages. Amongst a number of boys it will, of course, not unfrequently happen that one or more are from some cause absent. 2 Oh! those heathens! They understood, as the learned Bastiat, and before him the still wiser MacCulloch have discovered, noth- ing of Political Economy and Christianity. Their goods were still paid for with their own money. The quantity of money thrown into the circulation at the beginning of each day is of course de- termined by the sum of the prices of all the commodities circulat- ing simultaneously side by side. The same necessaries of life, at half the price, would form just as much muscle and bone, just as much vigour, but not vigour of the same value This confusion of "value" and "vigour" coupled with our author's Pharisaical indefiniteness, mark an attempt, futile for all that, to thrash out an explanation of surplus-value from a mere re-appearance of pre- existing values. 2 For further details on this subject see in my work cited above, the chapter on "The precious metals." 3 "II danaro e la merce universale" (Verri, 1. c, pp. 1 In manufacture, as well as in simple co-operation, the collec- tive working organism is a form of existence of capital. Parce qu'on y met un prix." Therefore value is what a thing is worth, and the land has its "val- ue," because its value is "expressed in money." This is, anyhow, a very sim- ple way of explaining the why and the wherefore of things. 163, note. Exactly a year before Nassau W. Before passing to the consideration of the extension of that legislation in England, we shall shortly no- tice certain clauses contained in the Factory Acts, and not relat- ing to the hours of work. The effect would be the same as if an alteration had taken place in the function of gold as a standard of prices. . x With 1 The census of England and Wales shows: all persons employed in agriculture (landlords, farmers, gardeners, shepherds, &c, included): 1851, 2,011,447: 1861, 1,924,110. This letter was rightly called in the House of Com- mons, the manufacturers' manifesto. The price in that case is imaginary, like certain quantities in mathe- matics. "As it was, he always felt restless at night, when he had closed his place, lest others should be working later than him and get- ting away his orders." 2 Summarising, the Gh. Empl. of tea, etc. . These periods have been divided, to correspond with the ma- terials from which their implements and weapons were made, viz., into the stone, the bronze, and the iron ages. J They are, one after the other, and with a degree of force unknown before, crushed by the competition of an agriculture managed by capital, and therefore they continual- ly furnish new recruits to the class of wage-labourers. Qrs. The less he is attracted by the nature of the work, and the mode in which it is carried on, and the less, therefore, he enjoys it as something which gives play to his bodily and men- tal powers, the more close his attention is forced to be. In insolent conflict with king and parliament, the great feudal lords created an incomparably larger proletar- iat by the forcible driving of the peasantry from the land, to which the latter had the same feudal right as the lord himself, and by the usurpation of the common lands. The peculiar conditions of the society in which he lived, alone prevented him from discovering what, "in truth," was at the bottom of this equality. MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OF COMMODITIES 143 Money of the world serves as the universal medium of pay- ment, as the universal means of purchasing, and as the univer- sally recognised embodiment of all wealth. The tool or working machine is that part of the machinery with which the industrial revolution of the 18th century started. Redgrave in "Rep. The latter is continually with- drawing commodities from circulation and stepping into their places, and in this way continually moving further and further from its starting-point. Their occupation is unwholesome, owing to the long hours, although in most cases they are not so long as under the old system. 2 These manufactures, nevertheless, allowed the scattered handicrafts and domestic industries to continue to exist as a broad foundation. the gross; in 1830 they were supplied by manufacture at 8s., and today the factory system supplies them to the trade at from 2s. Then he reckons £150 for coal used to heat the mill occasionally, and run the engine now and then. In the first place, in the form of machinery, the implements of labour become automatic, things moving and working inde- pendent of the workman. Gould com- modities themselves speak, they would say: Our use-value may be a thing that interests men. With new fashions, repairs, etc., a con- test arises between master and labourer, whether a particular piece of work is one hour, and so on, until here also experience decides. Nay, more: instead of simply representing the relations of commodities, it enters now, so to say, into private relations with itself. "By this decision, the Ten Hours' Act was 1 See Reports, &c, for 30th April, 1849, p. What confirms them in this view, is the peculiar circumstance that the use-value of objects is realised without exchange, by means of a direct relation between the objects and man, while, on the other hand, their value is real- ised only by exchange, that is, by means of a social process. The capitalist knows that all commodities, however scurvy they may look, or however badly they may smell, are in faith and in truth money, inwardly circumcised Jews, and what is more, a wonder- ful means whereby out of money to make more money. And even should they find employment, what a poor look-out is theirs! Crippled as they are by division of labour, these poor devils are worth so little outside their old trade, that they cannot find admission into any industries, except a few of inferior kind, that are over-supplied with underpaid work- men. Enough, that the world still jogs on, solely through the self- chastisement of this modern penitent of Vishnu, the capitalist. It is an ex- pression as imaginary as the value of the earth. On the other hand, the American Civil War brought in its train a colossal national debt, and, with it, pressure of taxes, the rise of the vilest financial aristocracy, the squandering of a huge part of the public land on speculative companies for the exploitation of railways, mines, &c, in brief, the most rapid centralisation of capital. On the other hand, if we consider money, its existence implies a definite stage in the exchange of commodities. 171, n. I don't know where he lives." "Christ was a wicked man." "This girl spelt God as dog, and did not know the name of the queen." ("Ch. Employment Comm. 1, 2, and preface, p. In working-day I, it is -^-, in working-day 11, -g-, in working-day III, -g- of A B. The action of labour-power, therefore, not only reproduces its own value, but produces value over and above it. We have already alluded to the physical deterioration as well of the children and young persons as of the woman, whom machinery, first directly in the factories that shoot up on its basis, and then indirectly in all the remaining branches of in- dustry, subjects to the exploitation of capital. 20. His dexter- ity at his own particular trade seems in this manner to be acquired at the expense of his intellectual, social, and martial virtues. of yarn. Since exchange-value is a definite social manner of expressing the amount of labour be- stowed upon an object, Nature has no more to do with it, than it has in fixing the course of exchange. Gooksley of Bristol, nail and chain, &c, manufacturers, spontaneously introduced the regulations of the Factory Act into their business. 32: "In luo- codi progettar sistemi inutili per la lelicita de'popoli, mi limitero a inves- tigare la ragione della loro infelicita." THE GENERAL LAW OP CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 647 the most servile, the most sordid, and the most ignoble offices in the community. In the year 1863, the Privy Council ordered an inquiry into the state of distress of the worst-nourished part of the English working-class. . The original capital was formed by the advance of £10,000. for the first time se- cured right of property for the peasants. But the value of labour in relation to other commodities ... Necessity itself compels him to apportion his time accurately between his different kinds of work. But the use of furnaces would involve a further loss in our case. This is a far more im- portant experiment than was the plague in the middle of the 14th century so belauded of Malthusians. there are mate- rialised the 12 hours' work done during the process itself. . (1.) A working-day of given length always creates the same amount of value, no matter how the productiveness of labour, and, with it, the mass of the product, and the price of each single commodity produced, may vary. Instead of the equation, 20 yards of linen=l coat, we should have 20 yards of linen=2 coats, since 1 coat would now contain only half the labour-time embodied in 20 yards of linen. Or the Balance of our Foreign Trade is the Rule of our Treasure. Its discovery, while removing all appearance of mere accidentality from the determination of the magnitude of the values of products, yet in no way alters the mode in which that determination takes place. The subdivision of labour is the assassination of a people." 3 Co-operation based on division of labour, in other words, manufacture, commences as a spontaneous formation. . Garnier, his French translator and commentator, who, under the first French Empire, quite naturally developed into a senator, quite as naturally opposes him on this point. The result was: "From 6th January to 20th April, 1844, with a twelve hours' day, average weekly wages of each hand 10s. If the men could insist on payment for over-work, this would be set right.... "The people who are employed in making up Surat cotton complain very much. 206 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION labour-process into which it enters as a means of production, but by that out of which it has issued as a product. 2. To borrow an illustration from chemistry, butyric acid is a different substance from propyl formate. I, p. Again, the production of different commodities depends on different seasons of the year. The first peculiarity that strikes us, in considering the form of the equivalent, is this: use-value becomes the form of manifes- tation, the phenomenal form of its opposite, value. This amount varies according to the more or less complicated character of the labour-power. The monopolies of salt, opium, betel and other commodities, were inexhaustible mines of wealth. 327-328.) 486 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION material supplied by commerce, is the gradual alteration of the in^ struments of labour. For every hour of absence Id. is to be subtracted from the wage. Moreover, where the manufacturer owned the cottages of the workpeople, he paid himself his rents by deducting the amount from these mis- erable wages. The building of new houses progresses very slowly, business very quickly. 2 On the other hand, the attempt to explain such expressions as merely poetic license only shows the impotence of the analysis. . As cap- italist, I buy commodities from A and sell them again to B, but as a simple owner of commodities, I sell them to B and then purchase fresh ones from A. to 8 p. With the help of mechanical force, they destroy the monopoly that male labour had of the heav- ier work, and they drive off from the lighter work numbers of old women and very young children. The antagonism between the relative form of value and the 68 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION equivalent form, the two poles of the value-form, is developed concurrently with that form itself. In simple circulation, C — M — C, the value of commodities attained at the most a form independent of their use-values, i.e., the form of money; but that same value now in the circulation M— C— M, or the circulation of capital, suddenly presents itself as an independent substance, endowed with a motion of its own, passing through a life-process of its own, in which money and commodities are mere forms which it assumes and casts off in turn. 1 Thus, after the extension of the Factory Act to the potteries, great increase of power-jiggers in place of hand-moved jiggers. It becomes evident, in the period of Modern Industry, that these implements, even under their form of manual tools, are already machines. 10.) 1 In The Times of 26th November, 1862, a manufacturer, whose mill employed 800 hands, and consumed, on the average, 150 bales of East Indian, or 130 bales of American cotton, complains, in doleful manner, of the stand- ing expenses of his factory when not working. In order to charm out of his bosom the awful conflict between the desire for enjoyment and the chase after riches, Malthus, about the year 1820, advocated a division of la- bour, which assigns to the capitalist actually engaged in produc- tion, the business of accumulating, and to the other sharers in surplus-value, to the landlords, the place-men, the beneficed clergy, &c, the business of spending. And gradual- ly, for many years past, the state of the labourer in these re- spects has been deteriorating, house-room being now greatly more difficult for him to find, and, when found, greatly less suitable to his needs than, perhaps, for centuries had been the case. This additional corvee is estimated at 14 days for each Wallachian peasant. 2 "The understandings of the greater part of men," says Adam Smith, "are necessarily formed by their ordinary employments. ." (n. This form exists first as the price of the commodity offered for sale, then as an actual sum of money, which, however, was already expressed in the price, and lastly, as the price of an equivalent commodity. So, too, when I ask why mules are so universally substituted for horses on the farm, the first reason given, and confessedly the most conclusive one, is that horses cannot bear the treat- ment that they always must get from negroes; horses are always soon foundered or crippled by them, while mules will bear cudgelling, or lose a meal or two now and then, and not be materially injured, and they do not take cold or get sick, if neglected or overworked. 42, 50. Money ends the movement only to begin it again. . c.) EXPROPRIATION OF AGRICULTURAL POPULATION 731 In the same line you have the Black Mount, an immense waste also recently erected. The technical conditions of the labour-process may be revolution- ised to such an extent, that where formerly ten men using ten implements of small value worked up a relatively small quanti- ty of raw material, one man may now, with the aid of one expen- sive machine, work up one hundred times as much raw material. THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 675 good by the parish, £18 6s. DIVISION OF LABOUR AND MANUFACTURE 341 he is tied to one and the same operation all day long; they vanish in proportion as the changes in his work diminish. If they send it out, which is not common, except as supplying chandlers' shops, they usually employ other hands for that purpose. Further, it is only while he labours that he produces any value at all, and the amount of his labour is measured by his labour-time. of Fact., 31st Oct., 1855.") These manufacturers are clever folk, and not without reason were they enthusiastic for the slave-holders' rebellion. 77 sq. So e.g., "A Joint-stock company returns £6,000 as assessable profits, the surveyor raises the amount to £88,000, and upon that sum duty is ultimately paid. This figure, compared with that of the daily mainte- nance of the labourer, shows a difference of 13 centimes. The advance made by the 18th century shows itself in this, that the law itself becomes now the instrument of the theft of the people's land, although the large farmers make use of their little independent methods as well. without over-time they could not earn a fair day's wages." ("Rept. 1 But in addition to the material wear and tear, a machine also undergoes, what we may call a moral depreciation. 69.) After Laing has illus- trated this by statistics, he continues: "If the people were all in easy cir- cumstances, the world would soon be depopulated." 644 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION army of labourers. * 1 In order to prove that labour alone is that all-sufficient and real measure, by which at all times the value of all commodities can be esti- mated and compared, Adam Smith says, "Equal quantities of labour must at all times and in all places have the same value for the labourer. Hence although the movement of the money is merely the expression of the circulation of commodities, yet the contrary appears to be the actual fact, and the circulation of commodities seems to be the result of the movement of the money. 52, n. The European states tore one an- other to pieces about the patent of this invention, and, once en- tered into the service of the surplus-value makers, did not merely lay under contribution in the pursuit of this purpose their own people, indirectly through protective duties, directly through export premiums. Two millions of acres... At first, carriage manufacture is a combination of various independent handicrafts. Say, who imagines that machines render the "service" of creating value which forms a part ol "profits." 2 A horse power is equal to a force of 33,000 loot pounds per minute, i.e., to a force that raises 33,000 pounds one foot in a minute or one pound 33,000 feet. Insp Fact. Here the capitalist regime has either directly conquered the whole domain of national production, or, where economic conditions are less developed, it, at least, indirectly controls those strata of society which, though belonging to the antiquated mode of production, continue to exist side by side with it in gradual decay. He estimates them at £6,000 a year. The useful qualities that labour-power possesses, and by virtue of which it makes yarn or boots, were to him nothing more than a conditio sine qua non; for in order to create value, labour must be expended in a useful manner. It is not a case of two independent forces working on one another. "(I. But in the capitalist the greed for surplus-labour appears in the straining after an unlim- ited extension of the working-day, in the Boyard more simply in a direct hunting after days of corvee. 360.) "Why not?" "Chiefly because the men who are gen- erally chosen, are men who know nothing about mines and such like." "Are not workmen summoned at all upon the juries?" "Never but as witnesses to my knowledge." "Who are the people who are generally summoned upon these juries?" "Generally tradesmen in the neighbourhood . Aps- den: "That boy of mine . II., p. If, on the other hand, we say, that in England the power-loom threw 800,000 weavers on the streets, we do not refer to existing machinery, that would have to be re- placed by a definite number of workpeople, but to a number of weavers in existence who were actually replaced or displaced by the looms. Rep. 134) 2 Dugald Stewart calls manufacturing labourers "living automatons ... The external physical conditions fall into two great economic classes, (1) Natural wealth in means of subsistence, i.e., a fruitful soil, waters teeming with fish, &c, and (2), natural wealth in the in- struments of labour, such as waterfalls, navigable rivers, wood, metal, coal, &c. If labour could be had without purchase, wages might be dispensed with." 1 But if the labourers could live on air they could not be bought at any price. c, p. (1), finishing; (2), mending. This law of the progressive increase in constant capital, in propor- tion to the variable, is confirmed at every step (as already shown) by the comparative analysis of the prices of commodities, whether we compare different economic epochs or different nations in the same epoch. Here two different kinds of commodities (in our example the linen and the coat), evidently play two different parts. In the interest of the so-called national wealth, he seeks for artificial means to ensure the poverty of the people. For there are also private gangs. 2 "It (the inquiry of 1861) ... 81.) $42 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION was 17; while at Liverpool those figures were represented as 35 against 15. 1863, pp 63, 64, also the "Rep. 48,354 2,031 Scotland . vi., p. The whole mechanism discloses a systematic division of labour; but a division like that in manufactures is impossible, since the smith and the carpenter, &c, find an unchanging market, and at the most there occur, according to the sizes of the villages, two or three of each, instead of one. the labouring man's wages will not, suitably to his low rank and station, as a labouring man, support such a family as is often the lot of many of them to have," he does not receive proper wages. Comm. 8 Since iron is one of the most important raw materials, let me here state that, in 1861, there were in England and Wales 125,771 operative iron foun- ders, of whom 123,430 were males, 2,341 females. in some instances it amounts 1 1 to 15 hours, from 5— a. In the comparison of the wages in different nations, we must therefore take into account all the factors that determine changes in the amount of the value of labour-power; the price and the extent of the prime necessaries of life as naturally and historically developed, the cost of training the labourers, the part played by the labour of women and children, the productiveness of labour, its extensive and intensive magnitude. ("Report of the Registrar-General." for October 1861.) 2 We, therefore, find, e.g., that in the beginning of 1863, 26 firms owning extensive potteries in Staffordshire, amongst others, Josiah Wedg- wood, & Sons, petition in a memorial for "some legislative enactment." Competition with other capitalists permits them no voluntary limitation of working-time for children, &c. How important is this element in the formation of the relative surplus-population, is shown by the example of 1 Even in the cotton famine of 1863 we find, in a pamphlet of the oper- ative cotton-spinners of Blackburn, fierce denunciations of over-work, which, in consequence of the Factory Acts, of course only affected adult male labour- ers. 3 The 10 Hours' Act has, in the branches of industry that come under it, "put an end to the premature decrepitude of the former long-hour workers." (Reports, &c, for 31st Oct., 1859, p. The secret of the self-expansion of capital resolves itself into having the disposal of a definite quantity of other people's unpaid labour. It increases and diminishes because the sum of the prices increases or diminishes in consequence of the change of price. It raged on through- out the whole manufacturing period. Whoever knows the life history of Arkwright, will never dub this barber-genius "noble." Of all the great inventors of the 18th century, he was incontestably the greatest thiever of other people's inven- tions and the meanest fellow. The special tools of the various detail workmen, such as those of the beaters, combers, spinners, &c, in the woollen manufacture, are now transformed into the tools of specialised machines, each machine constituting a special organ, with a special function, in the system. Tin and copper-mining: 1851, 31,360: 1861, 32,041. to 5 x / 8 d. 1. Apply &c." 2 The phrase "what can pass for 13 years," has reference to the fact, that by the Factory Act, children under 13 years may work only 6 hours. But this return is not owing to the circulation of the first 20 yards of linen; that circulation resulted in the money getting i nto the hands of the seller of the Bible. * The par- celling-out of the means of production among innumerable owners, working on their own account, annihilates, along with the cen- tralisation of capital, all the foundations of combined labour. According to Adam Smith, 10 men, in his day, made in 1 In an appeal, dated 1863, of the factory operatives of Lancashire, &c, for the purpose of forming a society for organised emigration, we find the following: "That a large emigration of factory workers is now absolutely essential to raise them from their present prostrate condition, few will deny; but to show that a continuous stream of emigration is at all times demanded, and, without which it is impossible for them to maintain their position in ordinary times, we beg to call attention to the subjoined facts: — In 1814 the official value of cotton goods exported was £17,665,378, whilst the real marketable value was £20,070,824. (2.) Berkshire Beenham. 2 They inaugurated the new era by practising on a colossal scale thefts of state lands, thefts that had been hitherto managed more modestly. When, at the beginning of this chapter, we said, in common par- lance, that a commodity is both a use-value and an exchange- value, we were, accurately speaking, wrong. Or because the labourer takes seriously the appearance of piece-wages, viz., that his product is paid for, and not his labour- power, and therefore revolts against a lowering of wages, unaccom- panied by a lowering in the selling price of the commodity. With this polarisation of the market for commodities, the fundamental conditions of capitalist produc- tion are given. London, 1767, pp. One need only glance superficially at the statistics of Eng- lish pauperism to find that the quantity of paupers increases with every crisis, and diminishes with every revival of trade. c, t.III, pp. The "drawbacks" of the system are the over- work of the chil- dren and young persons, the enormous marches that they make daily to and from the farms, 5, 6, and sometimes 7 miles distant, finally, the demoralisation of the gang. une valeur? The children and young persons, therefore, in all such cases may justifiably claim from the legislature, as a natural right, that an exemption should be secured to them, from what destroys prematurely their physi- cal strength, and lowers them in the scale of intellectual and moral beings." 2 It was not, however, the misuse of parental au- thority that created the capitalistic exploitation, whether direct or indirect, of children's labour; but, on the contrary, it was the capitalistic mode of exploitation which, by sweeping away the economic basis of parental authority, made its exercise degenerate into a mischievous misuse of power. They must have hands ready by them, they must be able to increase the activity of their operations when required, and to slacken it again, according to the state of the market, or they cannot possibly maintain that pre-eminence in the race of competition on which the wealth of the country is founded." 1 Even Malthus recognises over-population as a neces- sity of modern industry, though, after his narrow fashion, he explains it by the absolute over-growth of the labouring pop- ulation, not by their becoming relatively supernumerary. Represent- ing on the one hand a sold commodity, it represents on the other a commodity to be bought. Since the fractional product of each detail labourer is, at the same time, only a particular stage in the development of one and the same finished article, each labourer, or each group of labourers, prepares the raw material for another labourer or group. They thus, in fact, declare that consumption and other lung diseases among the workpeople are necessary conditions to the existence of capital. Who will get ready the meals, do the washing and mending? x It is owing to this that, in all metallic currencies, the names given to the standards of money or of price were originally taken from the pre-existing names of the standards of weight. Thus integument is burst asunder. Of course no detailed critique of this English industrial code now in effect can be presented here. Fonteret, Paris, 1858," and "Die Krankheiten, welche verschiednen Standen, Altern und Geschlechtern eigen- thumlich sind. On the subject of the great epochs in the history of the changes in the relative value of gold and silver, see Karl Marx, 1. Neverthe- less Dr. Simon, in his report of 1865, says: "Speaking generally, it may be said that the evils are uncontrolled in England." By order of the Privy Council, in 1864, an inquiry was made into the conditions of the housing of the agricultural labourers, in 1865 of the poorer classes in the towns. Accidental circumstances here play so great a part, that these two forms of labour sometimes change places. Naylor & Vickers, steel manufacturers, who employ between 600 and 700 persons, among whom only 10 per cent, are under 18, and of those, only 20 boys under 18 work in night sets, thus express themselves: "The boys do not suffer from the heat. Whether the coat serves as the equivalent and the linen as relative value, or the linen as the equivalent and the coat as relative value, the magni- tude of the coat's value is determined, independently of its value- form, by the labour-time necessary for its production. iii.). 'or 12x100 working-hours; and its total value-product, the equivalent of the variable capital advanced plus the surplus- value, can, day in, day out, never reach the sum of 1 ,200s. 2 c. If its accumulation, on the one hand, increases the demand for labour, it increases on the other the supply of labourers by the "setting free" of them, whilst at the same time the pressure of the unemployed compels those that are employed to furnish more labour, and therefore makes the supply of labour, to a certain extent, independent of the supply of labourers. is capital." (Mac- leod: "The Theory and Practice of Banking." London, 1855, v. The opposition or contrast existing inter- nally in each commodity between use-value and value, is, there- fore, made evident externally by two commodities being placed in such relation to each other, that the commodity whose value it is sought to express, figures directly as a mere use-value, while the commodity in which that value is to be expressed, figures di- rectly as mere exchange- value. 2 1 A. For this period I refer the reader to "Die Lage der arbeitenden Klasse in England," von Friedrich Engels, Leipzig, 1845. 106.) 2 "The isolation of the different stages of manufacture, consequent upon the employment oi manual labour, adds immensely to the cost of production, the loss mainly arising from the mere removals from one process to another." ("The Industry of Nations." Lond., 1855. 1. But very soon external circumstances cause a different use to be made of the concentration of the work- men on one spot, and of the simultaneousness of their work. 35 and pp. At the same time the oxygen of the air is consumed by gas-lights. . Its transactions during the year 1856, extending to many millions of pounds sterling, are here reduced to the scale of one million. A few months later, an individual named Robinson, also a cotton-spinner, and if not his Man Friday, at all events related to Eskrigge, appeared before the borough ma- gistrates of Stockport on a charge of introducing the identical plan of relays invented by Eskrigge. In this way an abnormally low selling price of the commodity arises, at first sporadically, and becomes fixed by degrees; a lower selling price which henceforward becomes the constant basis of a miserable wage for an excessive working-time, as originally it was the product of these very circumstances. Whilst the Liberal press asked how the fine gentlemen and ladies, and the well-paid clergy of the State Church, with whom Lincolnshire swarms, could allow such a system to arise on their es- tates, under their very eyes, they who send out expressly missions to the Antipodes, "for the improvement of the morals of South Sea Islanders" — the THE GENERAL LAW OP CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 697 (f.) Ireland In concluding this section, we must travel for a moment to Ireland. They are now capable of being compared with each other and measured, and the want becomes technically felt of comparing them with some fixed quantity of gold as a unit measure. Nowadays he is lucky if it is furnished with a little garden, or if he may rent, far away from his cottage, a few roods. 8 I. p. Dante would have found the worst horrors of his Inferno surpassed in this manufacture. The wage of the machine hands rises compared with that of the house-workers, many of whom belong to the poorest of the poor. This does not prevent him from calling upon the factory operatives to thank Providence, who by means of machinery has given them the leisure to think of their "immor- tal interests." 2 1 Ure, 1. Did they wait until, in consequence of this bril- liant remuneration, the agricultural labourers had so increased and multiplied that their wages must fall again, as prescribed by the dogmatic economic brain? und schlafet Sanft! es verkiinde der Hahn euch den Morgen umsonst! Dao hat die Arbeit der Madchen den Nymphen befohlen, Und itzt hiipfen sie leicht iiber die Rader dahin, DaB die erschutterten Achsen mit ihren Speichen sich walzen, Und im Kreise die Last drehen des walzenden Steins. This maximum limit is conditioned by two things. From 1851 to 1871, the farms under 20 acres fell by more than 900 in number; those between 50 and 75 acres fell from 8,253 to 6,370; the same thing occurred with all other farms under 100 acres. This system had grown up unto a regular trade. 217, sq.) What, "the courts say," I will illustrate by two examples. Tailoring and weav- ing are necessary factors in the creation of the use-values, coat and linen, precisely because these two kinds of labour are of differ- ent qualities; but only in so far as abstraction is made from their special qualities, only in so far as both possess the same quality of being human labour, do tailoring and weaving form the sub- stance of the values of the same articles. In the process we are now considering it is of extreme im- portance, that no more time be consumed in the work of trans- forming the cotton into yarn than is necessary under the given social conditions. In Europe, capital invests without hesitating a mo- ment, for the working-class constitutes its living appurtenance, always in excess, always at disposal. 20.) After enumerating the different provisions of these Acts, and the complications arising from them, Mr. Baker says: "It will hence appear that it must be very difficult to secure the execution of these three Acts of Parliament where the occupier chooses to evade the law." But what is assured to the lawyers by this is law-suits. * But consider, for example, an inhabitant of the eastern islands of the- Asiatic Archipelago, where sago grows wild in the forests. ii. 1 Leonard Horner uses the expression "nefarious practices" in his official reports. of Fact, for 31st Oct., 1855," pp. When the same trans- actions are continually repeated between the same persons, the conditions of sale are regulated in accordance with the conditions of production. Name and substance, nominal weight and real weight, begin their process of separation. I note before- hand that incomes from this source pay income tax on every- thing over £60. Insp Fact., 31st Oct., 1863," pp. Sixteen of these machines driven by oxen do as much work in a day as formerly 750 people did on an average. p. 2 Use-values become a reality only by use or consumption: they also constitute the substance of all wealth, whatever may be the social form of that wealth. This relation is here one of equality, the rate being 100%. 736 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION but for the third offence they are to be executed without mercy as felons. And so, too, is the value of labour-power, be- cause it depends on the values of commodities. 1.56 fr. But if Modern Industry, by its very na- ture, therefore necessitates variation of labour, fluency of func- tion, universal mobility of the labourer, on the other hand, in its capitalistic form, it reproduces the old division of labour with its ossified particularisations. Their growing wealth, and the relatively diminished number of workmen required to produce the necessaries of life beget, simultaneously with the rise of new and luxurious wants, the means of satisfying those wants. The annual production must in the first place furnish all those objects (use-values) from which the material components of cap- ital, used up in the course of the year, have to be replaced. c, p. The working-class is thus emersed to support a wretched factory population, a parasitical shop-keeping class, and a fictitious commercial, monetary, and financial system. given birth in the minds of the labourers to corresponding sentiments of antagonism and dissatisfaction towards those by whom they are thus led to regard themselves as being treated as ... 622 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION (shown rather qualitatively in the goodness than quantitatively in the mass of their products), the degree of productivity of labour, in a given society, is expressed in the relative extent of the means of production that one labourer, during a given time, with the same tension of labour-power, turns into products. 3 1. + £90 var.)+ £90 surpl. The Speech of Lord Ashley, March 15th, Lond., 1844, p. For the begotten are like those who beget them. One tree commonly yields 300 lbs., and occasionally 500 to 600 lbs. Would he otherwise sell it? So much greater therefore can be the excess of his labour for others over his labour for himself. 721.) "Do you think that the employers would find any fault with a man who obeyed the law. The seller gets it from the buyer and pays it away to another seller. etant toujours attire par les productions." (Le Trosne, 1. However terrible and disgusting the dissolution, under the capitalist system, of the old family ties may appear, nevertheless, modern industry, by assigning as it does an important part in the process of production, imitators) "leaves the children's minds silly." ("Proposals for Raising a Col- ledge of Industry of all Useful Trades and Husbandry." Lond., 1696, pp. 6. The intensity and productiveness of labour being given, the time which society is bound to devote to material production is shorter, and as a consequence, the time at its disposal for the free development, intellectual and social, of the individual is greater, in proportion as the work is more and more evenly divid- ed among all the able-bodied members of society, and as a par- ticular class is more and more deprived of the power to shift the natural burden of labour from its own shoulders to those of an- other layer of society. Unfortunately the acquisition of this art occurred at a time when they had nothing to cook. from their circumstances they are sometimes liable to be influenced by their employers . At first, capital subordinates labour on the basis of the tech- nical conditions in which it historically finds it. 103.) Redgrave, the Factory Inspector mentioned above, after the Industrial Exhibition in 1851, travelled on the Continent, especially in France and Germany, for the purpose of inquiring into the conditions of the factories. must be of indi- rect benefit to the labouring population, because it cheapens commodities of general consumption. The following table shows the movement of the exports: 1 "Census, &.c," 1. From this fact West and Ricardo drew the conclusion, that the diminu- tion in the productiveness of agricultural labour had brought about a fall in the rate of surplus-value, and they made this assumption of a fact that existed only in their imaginations, the starting-point of important investigations into the relative mag- nitudes of wage.-, profits, and rent. There were mules and steam-engines before there were any labourers, whose exclusive occupation it was to make mules and steam-engines; just as men wore clothes before there were such people as tailors. The cause of this imperfection is, apart from indis- tinct notions of value itself, that every change of form in a com- modity results from the exchange of two commodities, an ordinary one and the money-commodity. Several attempts to apply the principles of the Factory Acts, but in a modified form, to agriculture have been made, but have so far resulted in complete failure. As soon as capitalist production is once on its own legs, it not only maintains this separation, but reproduces it on a continually extending scale. 1 Nay more, in this work of changing the form he is constantly helped by natural forces. The mechanical lathe is only a cyclopean reproduction of the ordinary foot-lathe; the planing machine, an iron carpenter, that works on iron with the same tools that the human carpenter employs on wood; the instru- ment that, on the London wharves, cuts the veneers, is a gigantic razor; the tool of the shearing machine, which shears iron as easily as a tailor's scissors cut cloth, is a monster pair of scissors; and the steam-hammer works with an ordinary hammer head, but of such a weight that not Thor himself could wield it. i, book i., ch. But in whatever way the sum total of these outlays may be spread over the year, they must be covered by the average income, taking one day with another. First: The increasing concentration of the social means of production in the hands of individual capitalists is, other things remaining equal, limited by the degree of increase of social wealth. We therefore find that speculators make it a rule when such sudden changes in value 210 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION occur, to speculate in that material on which the least possible quantity of labour has been spent: to speculate, therefore, in yarn rather than in cloth, in cotton itself, rather than in yarn. About 30 power-loom weavers, in the employment of one Harrup, a cloth manufacturer at Leower's Mill, Westbury Leigh, struck work because master Harrup indulged in the agreeable habit of making deductions from their wages for being late in the morning; 6d. But alongside of this form we find another specifi- cally different form: M— C— M, the transformation of money into commodities, and the change of commodities back again into money; or buying in order to sell. It is well known that this relay system, this alternation of two sets of workers, held full sway in the full-blooded youth- time of the English cotton manufacture, and that at the pres- ent time it still flourishes, among others, in the cotton spinning of the Moscow district. 13, 14.) 1 Hence the absurdity of every law prescribing that the banks of a country shall form reserves of that precious metal alone which circulates at home. One party to the contract sells his la- bour-power, the other buys it. 2 He threatens all sorts of things. They found allies in the Tories panting for revenge. {Added in the 4th German edition.— The Krefeld silk industry also has its tale to tell anent this subject.)—/* 1 . The dull compulsion of economic relations completes the subjection of the labourer to the capitalist. In their difficulties our commodity- owners think like Faust: "Im Anfang war die That." They therefore acted and transacted before they thought. From the very outset it pre-supposes even a difference between their use-values and it has nothing whatever to do with their consump- tion, which only begins after the deal is closed and executed. With regard to the mode of production itself, manufac- ture, in its strict meaning, is hardly to be distinguished, in its ear- liest stages, from the handicraft trades of the guilds, otherwise than by the greater number of workmen simultaneously employed by one and the same individual capital. In no science is such a big fuss made with commonplace truisms as in Political Economy. of Fact., 31 Oct., 1856," p. The facts are simple The revolution in agriculture has kept pace with emig- ration. The number of labourers commanded by capital may remain the same, or even fall, while the variable capital increases. m. America, whose daily task (the heaviest perhaps in the world) consists in bringing to the surface on their shoulders a load of metal weighing from 180 to 200 pounds, fro:n a depth of 450 feet, live on bread and beans only; they themselves would prefer the bread alone for food, but their masters, who have found out that the men cannot work so hard on bread, treat them like horses, and compel them to eat beans; beans, however, are relatively much richer in bone-earth (phos- phate of lime) than is bread." (Liebig, 1. * In consequence of the separation of the social branches of production, commodi- ties are better made, the various bents and talents of men select a suitable field, 2 and without some restraint no important results can be obtained anywhere. This is similar to saying, that the value of cloth is estimated, not by the quantity of labour bestowed on its production, but by the quantity of labour bestowed on the production of the silver, for which the cloth is exchanged." ("A Critical Dissertation on the Nature, &c, of Value," pp 50, 51.) 536 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION give it an independent objective existence, he would sell a com- modity and not labour. These do not enter directly into the process, but without them it is either impossible for it to take place at all, or possible only to a par- tial extent. They declared that they would willingly pay for better dwellings if they were to be had. iii., p. The workman ... The reason is simply this, that the poor Irish farmer is incomparably more humane than the rich English. 2 Thus they still less dared to oppose a measure intended only to make the law of 1833 a reality. c, pp. 1 On the other hand, it is absolutely neces- sary that value, in order that it may be distinguished from the varied bodily forms of commodities, should assume this material and unmeaning, but, at the same time, purely social form. 2 I.e., pp. viii., c. This is at the rate of 9s. The new manufactures were established at sea-ports, or at inland points beyond the control of the old municipalities and their guilds. Just the contrary. By tools, I mean engineer's machinery, lathes, planing machines, drills, and so on." ("Royal Com. So soon as the gradually surging revolt of the working-class compelled Parliament to shorten compulsorily the hours of la- bour, and to begin by imposing a normal working-day on factories proper, so soon consequently as an increased production of surplus- value by the prolongation of the working-day was once for all put a stop to, from that moment capital threw itself with all its might into the production of relative surplus-value, by hasten- ing on the further improvement of machinery. So that in so small a platoon as that of even five, you will find the full complement of all that five men can earn." (E. If circumstances called for a fur- ther division of labour, the existing guilds split themselves up into varieties, or founded new guilds by the side of the old ones; all this, however, without concentrating various handicrafts in a sin- gle workshop. Compulsory working to death is here the recognised form of over-work. monetary functions which are usually performed by gold and silver coins, may be performed as effectually by a circulation of inconvertible notes, having no value but that factitious and conventional value they derive from the law, is a fact which admits, I conceive, of no denial. or 60 hours in any week; and that hereafter no minor shall be admitted as a worker under the age of 10 years in any factory within this State." State of New Jersey. 2 EXPORT OF COTTON FROM INDIA TO GREAT BRITAIN. c, p. ... No society can go on producing, in other words, no society can re- produce, unless it constantly reconverts a part of its products into means of production, or elements of fresh products. "Much as we deplore the evils before men- tioned, it would not be possible to prevent them by any scheme of agreement between the manufacturers.... When con- 1 Professor Roscher claims to have discovered that one needlewoman employed by Mrs. Deviations would occur 1 "Unquestionably, there is a good deal of difference between the value of one man's labour and that of another from strength, dexterity, and honest application. A more exhaustive study of Asiatic, and especially of Indian forms of common property, would show how from the different forms of primitive common property, different forms of its dissolution have been developed. Aussi le paysan se couche-t-il en hiver a minuit, une heure, et se leve a cinq ou six; ou bien il se couche a neuf, et se leve a deux, et cela tous les jours de la vie si ce n'est le dimanche. During such periods the operatives increase in number. worked from 6 p. This law clearly contradicts all experience based on appear- ance. When it steps into circulation as money, its value is already given. 63.) The cotton trade preponderates in Lancashire. But this advance once made, the purely mechanical working of the soil itself pro- duces a marvellous effect on the amount of the product. This result is owing to the quality of his labour, not to its quantity. 104.) 3 James Anderson: "Observations on the Means of Exciting a Spirit of National Industry, &c," Edinburgh, 1777. And this subordination is no mere momentary act. . This yard-measure, then, he applies to past, present, and future. Empl. 2 But the exploitation of these laws 1 Wood-working machines that are also capable of being employed on a small scale are mostly American inventions. At that time the contracts for farms ran for a long time, often for 99 years. 17, § 14). Another, at 9 years old, sometimes made three 12-hour shifts running, and, when 10, has made two days and two nights running." A third, "now 10 . The continuous chain of payments, or retarded first metamorphoses, is essentially different from that interlacing of the series of metamorphoses which we considered on a former page. The means of production are at once changed into means for the absorp- tion of the labour of others. c, pp. B. This dozen of individuals is maintained at the expense of the whole community. He has no intention of being robbed. Such an idea could only spring up in a bourgeois society already well developed. A and B see no difference between the two sets of transactions. Such a law exists; stated simply, it is as follows: the issue of paper money must not exceed in amount the gold (or silver as the case may be) which would actually use of gold in the main payments necessarily implies also its use in the re- tail trade: those who have gold coin offering them for small purchases, and receiving with the commodity purchased a balance of silver in return; by which means the surplus of silver that would otherwise encumber the retail dealer, is drawn off and dispersed into general circulation. — Doctor: I mean all those that live by buying and selling, for as they buy deare, they sell thereafter. of Insp. It was, therefore, not necessary to rep- resent our labourer in connexion with other labourers; man and his labour on one side, Nature and its materials on the other, sufficed. A=u Com. 140, &c. To express this, 1 call the value-composition of capital, in so far as it is determined by its technical composition and mirrors the changes of the latter, the organic composition of capital. Secondly, it serves as an ideal means of purchase. Worsted manufacture: 1851, 102,714 persons: 1861, 79,242. In the beginning of June, 1836, information reached the magistrates of Dewsbury (Yorkshire) that the owners of 8 large mills in the neighbourhood of Batley had violated the Factory Acts. I, p. 4 See the Report on the rag trade, and numerous details in "Public Health, VIII. The abolition of such taxes makes no change whatever in the quanti- ty of surplus-value that the capitalist extorts at first-hand from the labourer. III. The product, therefore, of individ- ual consumption, is the consumer himself, the result of productive consumption, is a product distinct from the consumer. c. In proportion as payments are concentrated at one spot, special institutions and methods are developed for their liquidation. Almost the whole of the remaining 140,000 are women, young persons, and children of both sexes, the male sex, however, being weakly represented. That work beyond 12 hours has a tendency to under- mine the health of the working-man, and so leads to premature old age and death, to the great injury of families of working-men, thus deprived of the care and support of the head of the family when most required."* 1 Report oi Committee on the Baking Trade in Ireland for 1861. CM 1 «o lO CO SS5 CO coo iO CO CM „-? * The number of such possible expressions is limited only by the number of the differ- ent kinds of commodities distinct from it. Lastly, suppose that every piece of linen in the market contains no more labour-time than is socially necessary. They are natu- ral forces of social labour. Therefore the value of the product is -j greater than the value advanced for its production; 27 shillings have been trans- formed into 30 shillings; a surplus-value of 3 shillings has been created. for ten minutes. The lower mid- dle-classes, the small manufacturers, the shopkeepers, the artisan, the peasant, all these fight against the bourgeoisie, to save from extinction their existence as fractions of the middle-ciass ... The process of production, considered on the one hand as the unity of the labour-process and the process of creating value, is production of commodities; considered on the other hand as the unity of the labour-process and the process of producing sur- plus-value, it is the capitalist process of production, or capitalist production of commodities. It must be annihi- lated; it is annihilated. oi Insp. 2 In addition to this, it would throw night-labour on those who worked instead of the boys, which they would not be able to stand. If in the fractions daily value of labour-power ., , . In the above instances we have laid stress upon the point that the men do the same, or the same kind of work, because this, the most simple form of labour in common, plays a great part in co-operation, even in its most fully developed stage. If we could succeed at a small expenditure of labour, in converting carbon into diamonds, their value might fall below that of bricks. The English do not make use of it, because the "wretch" 1 who does this work gets paid for such a small portion of his labour, that machinery would increase the cost of production to the capitalist. Equivalent has been exchanged for equivalent. By nature un- fitted to make anything independently, the manufacturing labour- er develops productive activity as a mere appendage of the capital- 1 "It is not sufficient that the capital" (the writer should have said the necessary means of subsistence and of production) "required for the sub- division of handicrafts should be in readiness in the society: it must also be accumulated in the hands of the employers in sufficiently large quantities to enable them to conduct their operations ona large scale.... the first half of the 18th century complaint is made if the cottar-e of the agricultural labourer has not an adjunct of one or two acres of land. "Labour being dearer in Ireland than it is in England ... The capitalist can now wring from the labourer a certain quantity of surplus-labour without allowing him the labour-time necessary for his own subsistence. If turbulence and strife will bring a profit, it will freely encourage both. The tokens keep company with gold, to pa) frac- tional parts of the smallest gold coin; gold is, on the one hand, con- stantly pouring into retail circulation, and on the other hand is as constantly being thrown out again by being changed into tokens. . Hence its name (toxo; interest and off- spring). * 1. But not so the rate of 100 100 aurplus-value, the real degree of exploitation of labour. In each case the value of the material of money, i.e., the value of the commodity that serves as the meas- ure of value, would have undergone a change, and therefore so, too, would the prices of commodities which express their values in money, and so, too, would the quantity of money current whose function it is to realise those prices. At the same time a change took place in the nature of relative surplus-value. There it is a definite social relation between men, that assumes, in their eyes, the fantastic form of a relation between things. W. In the same way the manifold concrete useful kinds of labour, embodied in these different commodities, rank now as so many different forms of the realisation, or manifestation, of undifferentiated human labour. c, p -•i. The total value of these la- 1 In the progress of culture "all, and perhaps more than all, the capital and labour which once loosely occupied 500 acres, are now concentrated for the more complete tillage of 100." Although "relatively to the amount of capital and labour employed, space is concentrated, it is an enlarged sphere of production, as compared to the sphere of production formerly occupied or worked upon by one single independent agent of production." (R. This portion of the working-day, I name surplus labour-time, and to the labour expended during that time, I give the name of surplus-labour. 1 While productive labour is changing the means of produc- tion into constituent elements of a new product, their value un- dergoes a metempsychosis. — Certainly not." No. 3048. If now the business extends, and the total capital employed grows to £1,500 under un- changed conditions, the number of operatives employed will in- crease to 300, just as many as before the introduction of the ma- chinery. of tea =20 yards of linen, etc. The watch manufactory of Messrs. It is owing to the fact that the linen contains only half as much labour as the coat, and consequently, that in the production of the latter, labour-power must have been expended during twice the time necessary for the production of the former. It has never occurred to the vulgar economist to make the simple reflexion, that every human action may be viewed, as "ab- stinence" from its opposite. of Insp. We may form an idea of the stupendous nature ol the cotton trade in that district when we con- sider that, of the gross number of textile factories in the United King- dom, it absorbs 45.2 per cent., of the spindles 83.3 percent., of the power- looms 81.4 per cent., of the mechanical horse-power 72.6 per cent., and of the total number of persons employed 58.2 per cent. The maintenance and reproduction of the working-class is, and must ever be, a necessary condition to the reproduction of capital. The same material has now more value, because it contains a greater quantity of labour. The labouring people should never think themselves independent of their superiors It is extremely dangerous to encourage mobs in a commercial state like ours, where, perhaps, seven parts out of eight of the whole, are people with little or no property. It deserts the consumed body, to occupy the newly created one. Engels in "Lage, &.C.," points out the miserable condition of a large number of those who work on these very articles of luxury. A certain 10 per cent, will ensure its employment anywhere; 20 per cent, cer- tain will produce eagerness; 50 per cent., positive audapity; 100 per cent, will make it ready to trample on all human laws; 300 per cent., and there is not a crime at which it will scruple, nor a risk it will not run, even to the chance of its owner being hanged. 1 To what extent the capitalist reckons the existence of such a skilled class among the factors of production that belong to him by right, and to what extent he actually regards it as the real- ity of his variable capital, is seen so soon as a crisis threatens him with its loss. This led to the rise of a restored mercantile system (Ganilh, &c), which sees in value nothing but a social form, or rather the unsubstantial ghost of that form. * A single machine, when it takes the place of co-operation or of manufacture, may itself serve as the basis of an industry of a handicraft character. . At Norwich, the chief seat of the clothing trade, a little creature of six years old was thought fit for labour. c, p. 31st October, 1862," p. I come at 6. Comm. Like the soldier he is caught young, ignorant, knowing only his own trade, and his own locality. We have already seen, that the sphere of circulation has an opening through which gold (or the material of money generally) enters into it as a commodity with a given value. 5 "With respect to the loss of trade by non-completion of shipping or- ders in time, I remember that this was the pet argument of the factory masters in 1832 and 1833. . Sans doute, il vaut mieuxvoir perir bes accumulations de capitaux que des g6ne- THE MODERN THEORY OP COLONISATION 771 What is now, according to Wakefield, the consequence of this unfortunate state of things in the colonies? The structure of the economic elements of society re- mains untouched by the storm-clouds of the political sky. An exposition of all these forms however, belongs to the special study of wage-labour, not therefore to this work. Hence in 1864, when the Commission had not yet published more than a part of its reports, the earthenware industries (including the potteries), makers of paper-hangings, matches, cartridges, and caps, and fustian cutters were made subject to the Acts in force in the textile industries. Ortes: "Delia Economia Nazionale libri sei,* 1777," in Custodi, Parte Moderna, t. 12. That part of capital then, which is represented by the means of production, by the raw material, aux- iliary material and the instruments of labour, does not, in the process of production, undergo any quantitative alteration of value. Vanderlint, 1. Hence their relations to each other 1 The learned Professor Roscher, after first informing us that "the false definitions of money may be divided into two main groups: those which make it more, and those which make it less, than a commodity," gives us a long and very mixed catalogue of works on the nature of money, from which it appears that he has not the remotest idea of the real history of the theory; and then he moralises thus: "For the rest, it is not to be denied that most of the later economists do not bear sufficiently in mind the peculiarities that distinguish money from other commodities" (it is then, after all, either more or less than a commodity!)... Say is pleased to call his doctrine and which he earnestly urges Mal- thus to teach at Hertford, as it is already taught 'dans plusieurs parties de l'Europe.' He says, ' Si vous trouvez une physionomie de paradoxe a toutes ces propositions, voyez les choses qu'elles expriment, et j'ose croire qu'elles vous paraitront fort simples et fort raisonnables.' Doubtless, and in conse- quence of the same process, they will appear everything else, except origi- nal." ("An Inquiry into those Principles Respecting the Nature of Demand, &c, " pp. . 658 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION of misery are exploited by house speculators with more profit or less cost than ever were the mines of Potosi. 7.) "The interest of trade requires, that corn and all provisions should be as cheap as possible; for whatever makes them dear, must make labour dear also ... c, t. l "The fraudulent mill-owner begins work a quarter of an hour (sometimes more, sometimes less) before 6 a. c, p. it ap- peared, were, six or eight months ago, earning the highest wages paid to artisans Their number would be more than dou- bled by the count of those who, having exhausted all their sav- ings, still refuse to apply to the parish, because they have a little left to pawn. Thompson: 'An Inquiry into the Principles of the Distribution of Wealth." London, 1824, p. The reduction in wage seems to have been carried to a greater extent than is necessary for increasing demand. c, pp. 8 See "Rep. Morton read before the Society of Arts a paper on "The forces employed in agriculture." He there states: "Every improvement that furthers the uniformity of the land makes the steam- engine more and more applicable to the production of pure mechanical force... Never mind! Thus it came to pass that the former sort accumulated wealth, and the latter sort had at last nothing to sell except their own skins. . Exchange-value is a thing that is connected one way or another with exchange. But not to anticipate, we will content ourselves with yet another example relating to the commodity-form. In this class are included all means of production supplied by Nature without human assistance, such as land, wind, water, metals in situ, and timber in virgin forests. 2 Instances: The Army Clothing Depot at Pimlico, London, the Shirt factory of Tillie and Henderson at Londonderry, and the clothes factory of Messrs- Tait at Limerick which employs about 1,200 hands. But this constant tendency to equilibrium, of the various spheres of production, is exercised, only in the shape of a reaction against the constant upsetting of this equilibrium. On the other hand, there is no difference between forms G and D, except that, in the latter, gold has assumed the equivalent form in the place of linen. Apart from all the other circumstances discussed above, it lowered wages. The instrument of labour, when it takes the form of a ma- chine, immediately becomes a competitor of the workman himself. Regnault^s "Histoire politique el sociale des Principautes Danubiennes," Paris, 1855. We can however follow this total product through all the stages of its production; and in this way we shall arrive at the same result as before, if we represent the partial products, given off at the different stages, as functionally different parts of the final or total product. But if, on the one hand, it is a popular delusion to ascribe stagnation in production and circulation to insufficiency of the cir- culating medium, it by no means follows, on the other hand, that an actual paucity of the medium in consequence, e.g., of bungling legislative inter- ference with the regulation of currency, may not give rise to such stagnation. 13. 166, seq. In the notorious district of Bethnal Green, a public market is held every Monday and Tuesday morning, where children of both sexes from 9 years of age upwards, hire themselves out to the silk manufac- turers. An hundred pounds' worth of lead or iron, is of as great value as one hundred pounds' worth of silver or gold." 1 As use-values, commodities are, above all, of different qualities, 1 N. 3 "Ch. Empl. If, however, we bear in mind that the value of commodities has a purely social reality, and that they acquire this reality only in so far as they are expressions or em- bodiments of one identical social substance, viz., human labour, it follows as a matter of course, that value can only manifest itself in the social relation of commodity to commodity. Since the quantity of money capa- ble of being absorbed by the circulation is given for a given mean velocity of currency, all that is necessary in order to abstract a given number of sovereigns from the circulation is to throw the same number of one-pound notes into it, a trick well known to all bankers. 2 "The Master Spinners' and Manufacturers' Defence Fund. In the family. c, pp. Smith: 1. the inhabitants of the country have lived from time immemorial The boundaries of the villages have been but seldom altered; and though the villages themselves have been sometimes injured, and even desolated by war, famine, and disease, the same name, the same limits, the same interests, and even the same families, have continued for ages. includes the whole labour of the engineer, not a portion; for one machine CONSTANT CAPITAL AND VARIABLE CAPITAL 205 On the other hand, a means of production may take part as a whole in the formation of value, while into the labour-process it enters only bit by bit. 62. They were picking oakum and disputing the while as to which could work the longest on a given quantity of food — for endurance was the point of honour. 1846.-34,540,143 lbs. He then did what is done by every purchaser of commodities; he consumed their use-value. by whose labour and skill such great results have been achieved." 1 And all that holds of the potteries in England is true of those in Scotland. 14,670,880 yds. Without this reflux, the operation fails, or the process is inter- rupted and incomplete, owing to the absence of its complementary and final phase, the sale. 554.) 2 "Pour avoir cet argent, il faut avoir vendu," 1. c'est au contraire, grace a Impropriation individuelle du sol qu'il se trouve des houimes n'ayant que leurs bras.... "The class of capitalists are from the first partially, and they become ultimately completely, discharged from the necessity of the manual labour." ("Textbook of Lectures on the Political Economy of Nations. Hence, in the value equation, in which the coat is the equiva- lent of the linen, the coat officiates as the form of value. They went through a course of teaching till they were finished printers. x The usurpation of the common lands allowed him to augment greatly his stock of cattle, almost without cost, whilst they yielded him a richer supply of manure for the tillage of the soil. In consequence of the civil war in the United States and of the accompanying cotton famine, the majority of the cotton operatives in Lancashire were, as is well known, thrown out of work. But that which at first was but a starting-point, becomes, by the mere continuity of the process, by simple reproduction, the pe- culiar result, constantly renewed and perpetuated, of capitalist production. 6 In truth, however, value is here the active factor in a process, in which, while constantly assuming the form in turn of money and com- modities, it at the same time changes in magnitude, differentiates 1 "II mercante non conta quasi per niente il lucro fatto, ma mira sempre al futuro." (A. To this end he proves how the development of the social productive power of labour, co-opera- tion, division of labour, use of machinery on a large scale, &c, are impossible without the expropriation of the labourers, and the corresponding transformation of their means of production into capital. per rood. that England was neuer less furnished with people than at the present ... We now know how the value paid by the purchaser to the possessor of this peculiar commodity, labour-power, is determined. The capital-value was originally advanced in the money-form. The use-values of commodities furnish the material for a special study, that of the commercial knowledge of commodities. Banjuwangi, a province of Java, in 1750 numbered over 80,000 inhabitants, in 1811 only 18,000. Rep., 1866," pp. 2 "The effect of improve- ments in machinery, not merely in superseding the necessity for the employment of the same quantity of adult labour as before, in order to produce a given result, but in substituting one descrip- tion of human labour for another, the less skilled for the more skilled, juvenile for adult, female for male, causes a fresh disturb- ance in the rate of wages." 3 "The effect of substituting the self- acting mule for the common mule, is to discharge the greater part of the men spinners, and to retain adolescents and children." 4 The extraordinary power of expansion of the factory system owing to accumulated practical experience, to the mechanical means at hand, and to constant technical progress, was proved to us by the giant strides of that system under the pressure of a short- ened working-day. seront declarees inconsti- tutionnelles, attentatoires a la liberte et a la declaration des droits de Thomme, &c"; felony, therefore, as in the old labour-statutes. can anything be worse for landowners or masters than parting with the best of the workers, and demoralising and disappointing the rest by an extended depletive emigration, a depletion of capi- tal and value in an entire province?" Potter, the chosen mouthpiece of the manufacturers, distin- guishes two sorts of "machinery," each of which belongs to the capitalist, and of which one stands in his factory, the other at night-time and on Sundays is housed outside the factory, in cot- tages. Daire t. 1 According to Gaskell, the steam-engine was from the very first an antagonist of human power, an antagonist that enabled the capitalist to tread under foot the growing claims of the work- men, who threatened the newly born factory system with a cri- sis. All the characteristics of Robin- son's labour are here repeated, but with this difference, that they are social, instead of individual. In consequence of the making of railroads in the City, "the spectacle has lately been seen in the East of London of a number of families wandering about some Saturday night with their scanty worldly 1 1. 2 "These mute agents (machines) are always the produce of much less labour than that which they displace, even when they are of the same money- value." (Ricardo, 1. Objects that in themselves are no commodities, such as conscience, honour, &c, are capable of being offered for sale by their holders, and of thus acquiring, through their price, the form of commodities. 1 Since the motion of the whole system does not proceed from the workman, but from the machinery, a change of persons can take place at any time without an interruption of the work. "The amount of work," say Tremenheere and Tufnell, who drafted the general report, "done by boys, youths, girls, and women, in the course of their daily or nightly spell of labour, is certainly extraordinary." (1. The spinner produces in 12 hours 20 lbs. How completely Engels understood the nature of the capitalist mode of production is shown by the Factory Reports, Reports on Mines, &c, that have appeared since 1845, and how wonderfully he painted the circumstances in detail is seen on the most superficial comparison of his work with the official reports of the Children's Employment Commission, published 18 to 20 years later (1863-1867). Thanks to these new mechanical combinations, I have reduced the number of grown-up men from 1,500 to 750. At last the critical point was reached. But, even in that case, the latter would extend its limits. C'etait cette annee tropique qu'il leur importait de marquer pour se diriger dans leurs operations agricoles. Whether members of his family or not, the men, boys, and girls all sleep in the cottage, which contains generally two, exception- ally 3 rooms, all on the ground floor, and badly ventilated. Ed. Baiter, Orelli, &c). And what sort of workmanship could we ex- pect from such hard-driven animals? Even the most superficial comparison requires the reduction first of the average day-wage for the same trades, in different countries, to a uniform working-day. Comm., II. Stuart Mill: "Essays on Some Unsettled Questions of Political Economy," Lond., 1844, p. Economistes financiers. The active lifetime of a machine is, however, clearly dependent on the length of the working-day, or on the duration of the daily labour-process multiplied by the number of days for which the process is carried on. Since he comes into the world neither with a looking glass in his hand, nor as a Fichtian philosopher, to whom "I am I" is sufficient, man first sees and recognises himself in other men. It is the absolute interest of every capitalist to press a given quantity of labour out of a smaller, rather than a greater number of labourers, if the cost is about the same. Besides these, there still exist, in India and China, two distinct antique Asiatic forms of the same industry. Then the value of these 24 pieces, after subtraction of the portion of constant capital contained in them, is 6 shillings, and the value of a single piece 3d. Liverpool waxed fat on the slave-trade. Hence, during the spinning process, the cotton absorbs six hours' labour. Report, p. On the one hand, therefore, manufacture either introduces division of labour into a process of production, or further devel- ops that division; on the other hand, it unites together handicrafts that were formerly separate. of Fact, for 31st Oct. . A horse, in like manner, can only work from day to day, 8 hours. 1 We assumed in our example, that the value of the product =£410 const. s. 31. Towns and manufactures will increase, because more will be driven to them in quest of places and employ- ment. G. c, p. On the other hand, the rate of surplus-value alone would not give us the extent of the working-day. If the ex- tremes of poverty have not lessened, they have increased, because the extremes of wealth have. 13, 14. . If the transaction is repeated, it is repeated as the result of a new agreement which has nothing to do with the previous one and which only by chance brings the same seller together again with the same buyer. The first fruit of the Civil War was the eight hours' agitation, that ran with the seven-leagued boots of the locomotive from the Atlantic to the Pacific, from New England to California. Nothing of the kind. Lightbourne: "Am 13 . The law of capitalistic accu- Cf. Karl Marx: "Zur Kritik der Politischen Oekonomie," pp. 122.) But now comes Carey, and cries out upon England, surely not with unreason, that it is trying to turn every other country into a mere agricultural nation, whose manufacturer is to be England. Calculated at this rate, the resources of the family would amount, at the maximum, to 1,068 francs a-year ... Let us assume, that some invention enables the spinner to spin as much cotton in 6 hours as he was able to spin before in 36 hours. is .... 2 These judicial farces, exclaims Inspector Howell, "urgently call for a remedy- either that the law should be so altered as to be made to conform to these decisions, or that it should be administered by a less fallible tribunal, whose decisions would conform to the law . 8 Whether the woollen manufacture ol england is not divided into several parts or branches appropriated to particular places, where they are only or principally manufactured; fine cloths in Somersetshire, coarse in Yorkshire, long ells at Exeter, soies at Sudbury, crapes at Norwich, linseys 354 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION lonial system and the opening out of the markets of the world, both of which are included in the general conditions of existence of the manufacturing period, furnish rich material for developing the division of labour in society. Even God Almighty does not escape this fate. improvements succeeded each oth- er so rapidly, that machines which had never been finished were abandoned in the hands of their makers, because new improvements had superseded their utility." (Babbage, I.e., p. Further, there is not the least doubt, that if you make your "hands" toil for 13 hours, instead of lly, and, as may be expected from you, treat the work done in that extra one hour and a half, as pure surplus-labour, then the latter 3 1 will be increased from 5— hours' labour to 7-y- hours' labour, and 4 4 2 the rate of surplus-value from 100% to 12620%. Hence the elementary form of value of a commodity is the elementary form in which the contrast contained in that commodity, between use-value and value, becomes apparent. This is the reason why the products of labour become commodities, social things whose qualities are at the same time perceptible and imperceptible by the senses. 218 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION surplus-value is determined by the surplus portion of the work- ing-day, it follows that surplus-value bears the same ratio to variable capital, that surplus-labour does to necessary labour, or in other words, the rate of surplus-value -= surplus " la 1 b ? Turn and examine a single commodity, by itself, as we will, yet in so far as it remains an object of value, it seems impossible to grasp it. 9.) "In agriculture, there is no more important factor than that of time." (Liebig: "Ueber Theorie und Praxis in der Landwirt- schaft." 1856, p. No house had more than one bedroom, not one of them a back-door; water very scarce; weekly rent from Is. 4d. For instance, J B Say sets himself up as a judge of crises, because, forsooth, he knows that a commodity is a product. Thus, instead of costing Ireland anything, emigration forms one of the most lucrative branches of its export trade. 1 In general, the time of working the mill is extended to 13 y hours, from 6 a. In the main, this clause re- mained inoperative. But in order that our owner of money may be able to find labour-power offered for sale as a commodity, various conditions 1 "In the form of money ... In his history of Henry VII., Bacon says: "Inclosures at that time (1489) began to be more frequent, whereby arable land (which could not be manured without people and families) was turned into pasture, which was easily rid by a few herdsmen; and tenancies for years, lives, and at will (whereupon much of the yeomanry lived) were turned into demesnes. of pressed glass. 107-110). Do we really know any more about "usury," when we say it contradicts "justice eternelle," "equite eternelle," "mutuality eternelle," and other "verites eternelles" than the fa- thers of the church did when they said it was incompatible with "grace eter- nelle," "foi eternelle," and "la volonte eternelle de Dieu"? "Sutherland ... Such are fish which we catch and take from their element, water, timber which we fell in the virgin forest, and ores which we extract from their veins. Blakey: "The History of Political Literature from the Earliest Times." Lond., 1855, Vol. 1 It may be said, that the whole economic history of society is summed up in the movement of this antithesis. Thus people speak of the value of labour and call its expression in money its necessary or natural price. The following are the statis- tics of 12 houses in Langtoft, with 12 bedrooms, 38 adults, and 36 children. The atmosphere of these cabins, combined with the other priva- tions they are subjected to, has made this class particularly sus- ceptible to low fever and pulmonary consumption." 1 After this, it is no wonder that, according to the unanimous testimony of the inspectors, a sombre discontent runs through the ranks of this class, that they long for the return of the past, loathe the present, despair of the future, give themselves up "to the evil influence of agitators," and have only one fixed idea, to emigrate to America. While, therefore, with reference to use-value, the labour con- tained in a commodity counts only qualitatively, with reference to value it counts only quantitatively, and must first be reduced to human labour pure and simple. c, p. 1 The new workwomen turn the machines by hand and foot, or by hand alone, sometimes sitting, sometimes standing, according to the weight, size, and special make of the machine, and expend a great deal of labour-power. 645, 1779.) "What is the feeling among the working miners as to the employment of women?" "I think they generally condemn it." (n. the sum of £510.The surplus-value is therefore in this case £510— £430 =£80. The form of piece-wages is just as irrational as that of time- wages. 1 We have one close at hand in the patriae 1 "A ridiculous presumption has latterly got abroad that common prop- erty in its primitive form is specifically a Slavonian, or even exclusively Russian form It is the primitive form that we can prove to have existed amongst Romans, Teutons, and Celts, and even to this day we iind numerous 78 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION chal industries of a peasant family, that produces corn, cattle, yarn, linen, and clothing for home use. He must, according to law, human and divine, be comforted for his enforced "abstinence" over and above this by a thumping profit. Such change of price holds good only in the case of commodities whose value remains constant. Say, "Lettres a M. Econ.," Lond. From the indica- tions as to the condition of the markets of the world in 1860 and 1861, we see that the cotton famine came in the nick of time for the manufacturers, and was to some extent advanta- geous to them, a fact that was acknowledged in the reports of the Manchester Chamber of Commerce, proclaimed in Parliament by Palmerston and Derby, and confirmed by events. s. This, however, can make no difference with regard to the quantitative relation of surplus-labour to necessary labour. On the other hand, the manufacture of the product may be united with oth- er manufactures, of which that product is the raw material, or with the products of which it is itself subsequently mixed. Ill, pp. This power is secured to them only by the command of machinery and of manual labour. If the variable capital diminishes, and at the same time the rate of surplus-value increases in the same ratio, the mass of surplus-value produced remains unaltered. A king is him that has all the money and gold. Two wretched children were tending her, themselves looking as much in need of nursing as their mother. 79. . Those who are on day- work work 5 days of 12, and 1 day of 18 hours; those on night-work 5 nights of 12, and 1 of 6 hours in each week. it is alleged t^at miners are commonly worked on lease; that the duration of the lessee's interest (which in collieries is commonly for 21 years), is not so long that he should deem it worth his while to create good accommodation for his labourers, and for the tradespeople and others whom the work attracts; that even if he were disposed to act liberally in the matter, this disposition would commonly be defeated by his landlord's tendency to fix on him, as ground-rent, an exor- bitant additional charge for the privilege of having on the sur- face of the ground the decent and comfortable village which the labourers of the subterranean property ought to inhabit, and that prohibitory price (if not actual prohibition) equally excludes others who might desire to build. "Consider my abstinence; I might have played ducks and drakes with the 15 shillings; but instead of that I con- sumed it productively, and made yarn with it." Very well, and by way of reward he is now in possession of good yarn instead of a bad conscience; and as for playing the part of a miser, it would never do for him to relapse into such bad ways as that; we have 1 This is the fundamental proposition on which is based the doctrine of the Physiocrats as to the unproductiveness of all labour that is not agri- culture: it is irrefutable for the orthodox economist. . According to one of the lists laid before Parliament, the Company and its employes from 1757- 1766 got £6,000,000 from the Indians as gifts. And to whom do they sell? Oct., 1863, p. consists in such- a quantity of necessaries and comforts of life, as, from the nature of the climate, and the habits of the country, are necessary to support the labourer, and to enable him to rear such a family as may preserve, in the market, an un- diminished supply of labour." (R. . worth of spin- dle, &c, worn away in the process. The working-day of 12 hours embodies itself, e.g., in a money-value of 6s. Tailoring and weaving, though qualitatively different productive activities, are each a productive expenditure of human brains, nerves, and muscles, and in this sense are human labour. 188.) 1 It will not be forgotten, that, with respect to the labour of children, &c, even the formality of a voluntary sale disappears. When numerous labourers work together side by side, wheth- er in one and the same process, or in different but connected proc- esses, they are said to co-operate, or to work in co-operation. The workpeople had hitherto offered a passive, although inflexible and unremitting resistance. The time tak- en in passing from one stage to another is shortened, so is the la- bour that effectuates this passage. l He and the owner of money meet in the market, and deal with each other as on the basis of equal rights, with this difference alone, that one is buyer, the other seller; both, therefore, equal in the eyes of the law. V. In that character it takes various forms peculiar to itself under which it makes itself at home in the sphere in his private room raised the lid of the desk he sat over, and displayed to a friend rolls of bank-notes, saying with intense glee there were £ 600,000 of them, they were held to make money tight, and would all be let out after three o'clock on the same day." ("The Theory of Exchanges. This constant quantity is the sum of the surplus-value plus the value of the labour-power, which latter value the labourer replaces by an equivalent. If, then, the capitalistic employment of machinery, on the one hand, supplies new and powerful motives to an excessive lengthening of the working-day, and radically changes, as well the methods of labour, as also the character of the social working organ- ism, in such a manner as to break down all opposition to this tend- ency, on the other hand it produces, partly by opening out to the capitalist new strata of the working-class, previously inaccessible to him, partly by setting free the labourers it supplants, a surplus working population, 2 which is compelled to submit to the dictation 1 Why it is, that the capitalist, and also the political economists who are embued with his views, are unconscious of this immanent contradiction, will appear from the first part of the third book. There is a very great consumption of luxuries among the labour- ing poor of this kingdom: particularly among the manufacturing populace, by which they also consume their time, the most fatal of consumptions." "An Essay on Trade and Commerce, &c," p. 2 Division of labour in society is brought about by the purchase and sale of the products of different branches of industry, while the connexion between the detail op- erations in a workshop, is due to the sale of the labour-power of several workmen to one capitalist, who applies it as combined labour-power. xxxii in the Report of H. m. "Mr. Senior has substituted for it" (the expression, labour and profit) "the expression Labour and Abstinence. An example, on the most colossal scale, of this movement is afforded by the production of wearing apparel. In the above examples, by the simply quantitative addition of CH 2 to the molecular formula, a qualitatively differ- ent body is each time formed. Of the hour and a half for meal-times, "one hour thereof at the least shall be given before three of the clock in the afternoon. The substitution of one value for another, is here effected by the creation of new value. On the same supposition as before, therefore, there are further 788,761 persons to emigrate; total, 1,709,532. Leonard Hor- ner reports, "Having endeavoured to enforce the Act . As a use-value, the linen is something palpably different from the coat; as value, it is the same as the coat, and now has the ap- pearance of a coat. If, nevertheless, there follows a reflux of money to its starting- point, this can only happen through a renewal or repetition of the operation. The elementary expression of the relative value of a single commodity, such as linen, in terms of the commodity, such as gold, that plays the part of money, is the price-form of that com- modity. of yarn. 4 Let us consider the matter a little more closely. Let us take one county that represents the average condition of things in all counties. 99.) 152 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION movement. On the earlier infamies of the factory sys- tem, cf. It is the production and reproduction of that means of production so indispensable to the capitalist: the labourer himself. There is not a word alluding to exchange-value or to the cheapening of commodi- ties. Od. has been produced in its place. "The poor stand still, because the rich have no money to em- ploy them, though they have the same land and hands to provide victuals and clothes, as ever they had;... Total cost of the above auxiliary materials, £10 week- ly. "Very many of us think," says a leader of July 2nd, 1863, "that, while we work our own young women to death, using the scourge of starvation, instead of the crack of the whip, as the instrument of compulsion, we have scarcely a right to hound on fire and slaughter against families who were born slave-owners, and who, at least, feed their slaves well, and work them lightly." In the same manner, the Standard, a Tory organ, fell foul of the Rev. 21 • Reports, &c, for 31st October, 1848, p 95. Therefore, the means of production can never add more value to the product than they themselves possess independently of the process in which they assist. In this way there is created, on the one hand, a constantly extending market for gold and silver, uncon- nected with their functions as money, and, on the other hand, a latent source of supply, to which recourse is had principally in times of crisis and social disturbance. "No part of the population of America is exclusively agricultural, excepting slaves 1 1 c, pp. In Germany, especially after the Thirty Years' War, statutes for keeping down wages were general. In the counties of Cambridge and Suffolk, for example, the area of cultivated land has extended very much within the last 20 years (up to 1868), while in the same period the rural population has diminished, not only relatively, but absolutely. 3 1. Le terme d'addition peint tres-bien la maniere dont se forme le prix des ouvrages de main-d'oeuvre; ce prix n'est qu'un total de plusieurs valeurs consommees et additionnees ensemble; or, additionner n'est pas multiplier." ("Mercier de la Riviere," 1. You might as well, said one of the better kind to a chaplain of Southallfield, try to raise and improve the devil as a brickie, sir!" 1 As to the manner in which capital effects an economy in the requisites of labour, in modern Manufacture (in which I include all workshops of larger size, except factories proper), official and 1 "Ch. Empl. The property of the church formed the religious bulwark of the traditional conditions of landed property. "But ... Soon he becomes a metayer, a half- farmer. CO-OPERATION 335 ployers, appears to be a specific form of the capitalist process of production. The first edition appeared in 1755.) Cantillon, from whom Quesnay, Sir James Steuart & A Smith have largely drawn, already here represents piece-wage as simply a modified form of time-wage. We stated, on a previous page, that in the creation of surplus- value it does not in the least matter, whether the labour ap- propriated by the capitalist be simple unskilled labour of aver- age quality or more complicated skilled labour. 50, 100, &c, continually dimin- ishes. Nevertheless, even in this case, the increased production of surplus-value arises from the curtailment of the necessary labour- 318 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION time, and from the corresponding prolongation of the surplus-la- bour. At one time gold was too high, at another, silver. tends directly to encourage the young potter greatly to over-work himself during the four or five years during which he is employed in the piece-work system, but al low wages ... 139, 141, 143, 158, 160). Age 3 5-4 5. Where, for instance, the physique of the working-class has deteriorated, and is, relatively speaking, exhausted, which is the case in all countries with a well developed capitalist production, the lower forms of labour, which demand great expenditure of muscle, are in general considered as skilled, compared with much more delicate forms of labour; the latter sink down to the level of unskilled labour. Fact. 6, n. 2 It is true that the popular mind is impressed by the sight, on the one hand, of the mass of goods that are stored up for grad- ual consumption by the rich, 8 and on the other hand, by the for- mation of reserve stocks; the latter, a phenomenon that is common to all modes of production, and on which we shall dwell for a mo- ment, when we come to analyse circulation. In the south of England certain landed proprietors and well-to-do farmers put their heads together and propounded ten questions as to the right interpretation of the poor-law of Elizabeth. The Employment of Women and Children In so far as machinery dispenses with muscular power, it becomes a means of employing labourers of slight muscular strength, and those whose bodily development is incomplete, but whose limbs are all the more supple. If an invention is made by which it can be produced in 3 hours, the 1 "If you call labour a commodity, it is not like a commodity which is first produced in order to exchange, and then brought to market where it must exchange with other commodities according to the respective quantities of each which there may be in the market at the time; labour is created the moment it is brought to market; nay, it is brought to market before it is created." ("Observations on Certain Verbal Disputes, etc.," pp. We have seen how this absolute contradiction between the technical necessities of Modern Indus- try, and the social character inherent in its capitalistic form, dis- pels all fixity and security in the situation of the labourer; how it constantly threatens, by taking away the instruments of la- bour, to snatch from his hands his means of subsistence, * and, by suppressing his detail-function, to make him superfluous. of yarn. We there saw how machinery, by annexing the labour of women and children, augments the number of hu- man beings who form the material for capitalistic exploitation, how it confiscates the whole of the workman's disposable time, by immoderate extension of the hours of labour, and how finally its progress, which allows of enormous increase of production in shorter and shorter periods, serves as a means of systematically getting more work done in a shorter time, or of exploiting labour- power more intensely. The hardships and the earnings, instead of being directly proportional, as in any just arrangements of society they v would be, are gen- erally in an inverse ratio to one another." To avoid misunderstanding, let me say that although men like John Stuart Mill are to blame for the con- tradiction between their traditional economic dogmas and their modern CONVERSION OP SURPLUS-VALUE INTO CAPITAL 611 al cases, has he the power to enlarge the so-called labour-fund at the expense of the "revenue" of the wealthy. Some idea of the ground laid waste for purely sporting purposes in Scotland may be formed from the fact that it embraced an area larger than the whole county of Perth. 6, 9, 22, 25, etc. "Both were still gainers: the worker because he was advanced the fruits of his labour" (should read: of the unpaid labour of other workers) "before the work was done" (should read: before his own labour had borne fruit); "the employer (le maitre), because the labour of this worker was worth more than his wages" (should read: produced more value than the value of his wages). Among the defenders of the working-classes the foremost are: Jacob Vanderlint, in: "Money Answers all Things." London, 1734; the Rev. The first is the identification of the circulation of com- modities with the direct barter of products, by simple abstraction from their points of difference: the second is, the attempt to explain away the contradic- tions of capitalist production, by reducing the relations between the persons engaged in that mode of production, to the simple relations arising out of the circulation of commodities. Thus the villainies of the Venetian 1 :, 3i les Tartares inondaient l' Europe aujourd'hui, il faudrait bien des affaires pour leur t'aire entendre ce que c'est qu'un financier parmi nous.'* Montesquieu, "Esprit des lois," t. From this it follows that, whatever the amount of the real wage, its money rate must rise. This fact must therefore make itself plainly visible in the currency of money. 1. This operation, conducted on a general scale, appears to imply a contradiction. . Steuart and others, by A. It is otherwise with the "housing of the poor." Every unprejudiced observer sees that the greater the central- isation of the means of production, the greater is the correspond- ing heaping together of the labourers, within a given space; that therefore the swifter capitalistic accumulation, the more miserable are the dwellings of the working-people. That machinery, after the horrors of the period of introduction and development have subsided, instead of dimin- ishing, in the long run increases the number of the slaves of labour! Yes, Political Economy revels in the hideous theory, hideous to every "philanthropist" who believes in the eternal Nature-ordained necessity for capitalist production, that after a period of growth and transition, even its crowning success, the factory system based on machinery, grinds down more workpeople than on its first in- troduction it throws on the streets. But, what is a working-day? it was shown, how the development of the produc- tiveness of social labour pre-supposes co-operation on a large scale; how it is only upon this supposition that division and combination of labour can be organised, and the means of production econo- mised by concentration on a vast scale; how instruments of labour which, from their very nature, are only fit for use in common, such as a system of machinery, can be called into being; how huge natural forces can be pressed into the service of production; and how the transformation can be effected of the process of production 624 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION into a technological application of science. When once a commodity has found a resting-place, where it can serve as a use-value, it falls out of the sphere of ex- change into that of consumption. Torrens: "An Essay on the Production of Wealth," &c, pp. 167 CHAPTER VI THE BUYING AND SELLING OF LABOUR-POWER THe change of value that occurs in the case of money intended to be converted into capital, cannot take place in the money itself, since in its function of means of purchase and of payment, it does no more than realise the price of the commodity it buys or pays for; and, as hard cash, it is value petrified, never varying. the other nights." "Another, now 13, . 2 Dr. Letheby, Consulting Physician of the Board of Health, declared: "The minimum of air for each adult ought to be in a sleeping room 300, and in a dwelling room 500 cubic feet." Dr. Richardson', Senior Physician to one of the London Hospitals: "With needlewomen of all kinds, including THE WORKING -DAY 255 millinery establishments in London. Experimenta in corpore vili, like those of anatomists on frogs, were formally made. We may melt down the heaviest and turn it into the splendour of plate, vessels or utensils of gold or silver; or send it out as a commodity, where the same is wanted or desired; or let it out at interest, where interest is high." (W. 171, n. Massie. 186. The fact that the owner of the commodities, under the designation of producer, sells them over their value, and under the designation of consumer, pays too much for them, does not carry us a single step further. "The extension of the railway system throughout the country has tended very much to encourage giving short notice. Now, however much the use of machinery may increase the surplus-labour at the expense of the necessary labour by heighten- ing the productiveness of labour, it is clear that it attains this result, only by diminishing the number of workmen employed by a given amount of capital. . t , ,, „ r , . The same labour extracts from rich mines more metal than from poor mines. It is not the articles made, but how they are made, and by what instru- ments, that enables us to distinguish different economic epochs. The elementary factors of the labour-process are 1, the per- sonal activity of man, i.e., work itself, 2, the subject of that work, and 3, its instruments. But the connexion between the two acts exists for me alone. 2 But, finally, part of the sheep-walks are turned into deer preserves. II, L. . Hence, fifteen shillings is an adequate price for the 10 lbs. 2 "Suggestions, &c. Part of the agri- cultural population is therefore constantly on the point of passing over into an urban or manufacturing proletariat, and on the look-out for circumstances favourable to this transformation. This mode is based on the dominion of man over Nature. In the year 1847 there MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 447 All the persons employed in textile factories and in mines, taken together, number 1,208,442; those employed in textile factories and metal industries, taken together, number 1,039,605; in both cases less than the number of modern domestic slaves. It is one of the secrets of the conservation of the Ottoman Empire. V. Say, 1. Cyrop. 396, 998 2 The servant class, 1,208,648 8 1 Of these only 177,596 are males above 13 years of age. The degree of culture of these "labour-powers" must naturally be such as appears in the following dialogues with one of the com- missioners: Jeremiah Haynes, age 12 — "Four times four is 8; 4 fours are 16. Profane commodi- ties can no longer replace it. The English agricultural labourer receives only */4 as much milk, and J4 as much bread as the Irish. II 2 Bentham is a purely English phenomenon. for journeymen tailors in and around London, except in cases of gen- eral mourning; still, 13 George III., c. Eden is as to the hor- rors of the expropriation of the agricultural population from the soil, from the last third of the 15th century to his own time; with all the self-satisfaction with which he rejoices in this process, "essential" for establishing capitalistic agriculture and "the due proportion between arable and pasture land'* — he does not show, however, the same economic insight in respect to the necessity of child-stealing and child-slavery for the transformation of manu- facturing exploitation into factory exploitation, and the establish- ment of the "true relation" between capital and labour-power. p. But in the straw-plait schools space is more sparingly allotted than 2 1 in the lace-schools, "12^-, 17, 18 — and below 22 cubic feet for each person." The smaller of these numbers, says one of the commission- ers, Mr. White, represents less space than the half of what a child would occupy if packed in a box measuring 3 feet in each direction. In the same way, the 2-^ lbs. . The two latter peculiarities of the equivalent form will become more intelligible if we go back to the great thinker who was the first to analyse so many forms, whether of thought, society, or Nature, and amongst them also the form of value. x In order to be sold as a commodity in the market, labour must at all events exist before it is sold. Variable capital preponderated greatly over constant. Wakefield: "England and America," vol. In the period between 1799 and 1815 the increasing price of provisions led in PJngland to a nominal rise in wages, although CHANGES OF MAGNITUDE 529 the real wages, expressed in the necessaries of life, fell. . 1 2 families York Street, No. 34 . But, at the same time, every actual sum of money is limited in amount, and, therefore, as a means of purchasing, has only a limited efficacy. x The sum of the necessary labour and the surplus-labour, i.e., of the periods of time during which the workman replaces the value of his labour-power, and produces the surplus-value, this sum constitutes the actual time during which he works, i.e., the working-day. He meets the effort; the result is, that producing for a limited time a fourth more work, he dies at 37 for 50." 1 SECTION 4.— DAY AND NIGHT WORK. 2 "Among the wild Indians in America, almost everything is the la- bourer's, 99 parts of a hundred are to be put upon the account of labour. Senior, "lays down his spade, he renders useless, for that period, a capital worth eighteenpence. We leave out of consideration here any accidental miscal- culation of value by our friend, a mistake that is soon rectified in the market. c, pp. But just as a man requires lungs to breathe with, so he requires something that is work of man's hand, in order to con- sume physical forces productively. We must now return to this form under which value first appeared to us. 3 Marie Augier: "Du Credit Public." Paris, 1842. . 1 "There are numerous operations of so simple a kind as not to admit a division into parts, which cannot be performed without the co-operation of many pairs of hands. 62. From the pole of the com- modity-owner it is a sale, from the opposite pole of the money- owner, it is a purchase. which treats of the history of the theory, it will be more clearly seen, that the production of surplus-value has at all times been made, by classical political economists, the distinguishing characteristic of the productive labourer. With the dryest naivete he takes the mod- ern shopkeeper, especially the English shopkeeper, as the normal man. Nevertheless, in spite of the mass of hands actually dis- placed and virtually replaced by machinery, we can understand how the factory operatives, through the building of more mills and the extension of old ones in a given industry, may become more numerous than the manufacturing workmen and handicrafts- men that have been displaced. With deep insight into Political Economy, however, the working-day is not taken in its ordinary sense, but as the working-day necessary to the pro- duction of an average daily product; and that average daily prod- uct is determined in so crafty a way that no Cyclops would be done with it in 24 hours. From little occupiers of land, they are reduced to the state of day-labourers and hirelings; and, at the same time, their subsistence in that state has become more difficult." 4 In fact, 1 Rev. Newman Hall: "He excommunicated the slave-owners, but prays with the fine folk who. But in the latter case, the labourer is to that extent really a capitalist in the concern, by supplying a portion of the funds necessary for car- rying it on." Mill might have gone further and have added, that the labourer who advances to himself not only the necessaries of life but also the means of production, is in reality nothing but his own wage-labourer. 78. And the consumption of the commodity belongs not to the seller who parts with it, but to the buyer, who 1 This question is far more important than the celebrated question of Sir Robert Peel to the Birmingham Chamber of Commerce: What is a pound? 4 1. The relative magnitude of the accumulation-fund may even increase at the expense of the consumption-fund, whilst the cheapening of commodities places at the disposal of the capitalist as many means of enjoyment as for- merly, or even more than formerly. "Child. But with a spinning-wheel, supposing the hand-spinner to produce thirteen ounces of yarn in sixty hours, the same weight of cotton would absorb 2,700 days' labour of ten hours each, or 27,000 hours' labour. In any case the market for commodities is only frequented by owners of commodities, and the power which these persons exercise over each other, is no other than the power of their com- modities. For the rest England figures here in the foreground because she is the classic representative of capitalist produc- tion, and she alone has a continuous set of official statistics of the things we are considering. The parish of Bradenham comprises 1,000 acres; it numbered, in 1851, 36 houses and a population of 84 males and 54 females. Apart then from all accumulation, the mere continuity of the process of production, in other words simple reproduction, sooner or later, and of necessity, converts every capital into accumulated capital, or capitalised surplus-value. Equality, because each enters into relation with the other, as with a simple owner of commodi- ties, and they exchange equivalent for equivalent. 129 sq.) 72 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION from this form itself. VALUE OF LABOUR-POWER AND WAOES 537 value, even of the commodity already produced, falls by half. Now this method has become inadequate and has been forced into the background by the processing of the quartz lodes themselves, a way of extraction which formerly was only of secondary importance, al- though well known to the ancients (Diodorus, III, 12-14) (Diodor's v. Conf. It is, however, nei- ther the one nor the other, but is both together. c, p. In the finished product the labour by means of which it has acquired its useful qualities is not palpable, has apparently vanished. . The sum of £1,500 that formerly represent- ed the wages of the discharged carpet-makers, now represents in the shape of machinery: (1) the value of the means of production used in the construction of that machinery, (2) the wages of the me- chanics employed in its construction, and (3) the surplus-value falling to the share of their "master." Further, the machinery need not be renewed till it is worn out. From our present data, and within the limits of the assumptions made on p. Capitalist production once assumed, then, all other circum- stances remaining the same, and given the length of the working- day, the quantity of surplus-labour will vary with the physical conditions of labour, especially with the fertility of the soil. naturalmente moneta." (Galiani, "Delia moneta" in Custodi's Collection: Parte Moderna t. It does not therefore help matters one jot, to repeat in parrot fashion, that things have a tendency to find their level. When this result is attained, the process is at an end. In other words, there is contained in 1 lb. S. Entirely new branches of production, creating new fields of labour, are also formed, as the direct result either of ma- chinery or of the general industrial changes brought about by it. My experience, which is considerable, in treating the diseases of stove workers, compels me to express the opinion that their sanitary condition is by no means so high as that of the operatives in a spinning factory (and Capital, in its memorials to Parliament, had painted them as floridly healthy, after the manner of Rubens). c, Vol. 80.) 326 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION cavalry or infantry soldiers taken separately, so the sum total of the mechanical forces exerted by isolated workmen differs from the social force that is developed, when many hands take part simul- taneously in one and the same undivided operation, such as rais- ing a heavy weight, turning a winch, or removing an obstacle. 8 1. . xxxv., n. Jones. Now, in what manner does every labourer add new labour and consequently new value? Lond., 1850, p. a-week wages, when the manufac- turer cannot do it lor the 50 or 100 children lodged, boarded, superintended all together. Rep.," p. These statutes, legally binding until the beginning of the 18th century, were only re- pealed by 12 Anne, c. We have seen how the progressive development of a society of commodity-producers stamps one privileged com- modity with the character of money. The composition of capital changed but very slowly. 39.) 3 These various functions are liable to come into dangerous conllict with one another whenever gold and silver have also to serve as a fund for the conversion of bank-notes. Earl Shaftesbury, then Lord Ashley, was commander-in-chief in the aristocratic, philanthropic, anti-factory campaign. Outside these circumstances, it is no more capital than gold is intrinsically money, or sugar is the price of sugar .... 96. 80, n. 2,776,218,427 lbs. c, p. That is to say, the mechanism of capitalistic production so manages matters that the absolute increase of capi- tal is accompanied by no corresponding rise in the general demand for labour. The rooms, in which labourers in many cases live, are situated in confined and unwhole- some yards or courts, and for space, light, air, and cleanliness, are models of insufficiency and insalubrity, and a disgrace to any civilised community; in them men, women, and children lie at night huddled together; and as regards the men, the night-shift succeed the day-shift, and the day-shift the night-shift in unbroken series for some time together, the beds having scarcely time to cool; the whole house badly supplied with water and worse with privies; dirty, unventilated, and pestiferous." 2 The price per week of such lodgings ranges from 8d. 132.) Sometimes an exceptionally soft-hearted land- lord relents at the solitude he has created. 1 "Une richesse en argent n'est que... Obsequium ventris istis (the labourers) perniciosius est. Thus in England, dur- ing half a century, lengthening of the working-day went hand in hand with increasing intensity of factory labour. The February revolu- tion was necessary to bring into the world the 12 hours' law, 2 which is much more deficient than its English original. Paris, 1836, p. Total or Expanded form of value z Com. .the bushel of wheat shall cost five shillings and that he (a manufacturer) earns a shilling by his labour, he then would be obliged to work five days only in a week. Had it not existed before, neither could it after that transaction." (Ramsay, 1. . Hoarding serves various purposes in the economy of the met- allic circulation. 2) Non-Textile Factories. p. Productive activity, if we leave out of sight its special form, viz., the useful character of the labour, is nothing but the ex- penditure of human labour-power. "It has happened in times past that these Oriental States, after supplying the expenses of their civil and military establish- ments, have found themselves in possession of a surplus which they could apply to works of magnificence or utility and in the con- struction of these their command over the hands and arms of almost the entire non-agricultural population has produced stupendous monuments which still indicate their power. A greater quantity of labour, done by the same number of labourers as be- fore, thus increases the fertility, without requiring any new advance in the instruments of labour. It is true that a carriage cannot be gilt before it has been made. . A. It is, however, possible that, owing to an increase of produc- tiveness, both the labourer and the capitalist may simultaneously be able to appropriate a greater quantity of these necessaries, without any change in the price of labour-power or in surplus-value. in consequence of the additional supply of labour having diminished its price." (Senior, I. But there is another point to be considered in our calculation. 125.) According to him, Urquhart himself is one of the chief agents in the ruin of Turkey, where he had made Free-trade propaganda in the English interest. So far, therefore, has the price of labour been even from advanc- ing in proportion to the increase in the expenses of living, that it does not appear that it bears now half the proportion to those expenses that it did bear." 2 Barton, 1. That mass remains constantly within the sphere of circulation, continually functions as a circulating medium, and exists exclusively for that purpose. But the wider scope that piece- wage gives to individuality, tends to develop on the one hand that individuality, and with it the sense of liberty, independence, and self-control of the labourers, on the other, their competition one with another. And yet, though wages sink lower and lower, profits appear, with each alteration in the scale of wages, to increase. However little our written histories up to this time notice the development of material production, which is the basis of all social life, and therefore of all real history, yet prehistoric times have been classified in accordance with the results, not of so-called historical, but of materialistic investigations. The ordinance of 1350 in France, issued in the name of King John, corresponds with it. This productiveness is determined by various circumstances, amongst others, by the average amount of skill of the workmen, the state of science, and the degree of its practical application, the social organisation of production, the extent and capabilities of the means of production, and by physical conditions. . x Even in the last decade of the 17th century, the yeomanry, the class of independent peasants, were more numerous than the class of farmers. 135.) Very often the beerseller or grocer of the village is at the same time the letter of its houses. As the working-day, so, too, the working year, may be conceived to consist of ll 1 / 2 hours or 23 half-hours, but each multiplied by the number of working-days in the year. *j « eo g« 3 ■C 3 c o j) ra w <V 3 C ro CD 3 C <u «E« — o ChSS QAwS QiV.5& Pnfe 6 WO 14.9 598 Wigan 644 18.0 Cotton 42.6 708 Blackburn 734 34.9 Do. 37.3 547 Halifax 564 20.4 Worsted 41.9 611 Bradford 603 30.0 Do. 31.0 691 Macclesfield 804 26.0 Silk 14.9 588 Leek 705 17.2 Do. 36.6 721 Stoke-upon-Trent 665 19.3 Earthenware 30.4 726 Woolstanton Eight healthy agricultural 727 13.9 Do. 305 districts 340 1 It is well known with what reluctance the English "Free-traders'* gave up the protective duty on the silk manufacture. The capitalist thinks, that he is consuming the produce of the unpaid labour of others, i.e., the surplus-value, and is keeping intact his original capital; but 1 "The wages of labour are advanced by capitalists in the case of less than one fourth of the labourers of the earth." (Rich. If now we further suppose the price of each commodity to be given, the sum of the prices clearly depends on the mass of commodities in circulation. "Ignorance is the mother of industry as well as of superstition. . The quality of the labour is here controlled by the work it- self, which must be of average perfection if the piece-price is to be paid in full. This they did in the sycophantic service of the crowned heads, support- ing the right of the latter to debase the coinage, during the whole of the mid- dle ages, by the traditions of the Roman Empire and the conceptions of money to be found in the Pandects "Qu'aucun puisse ni doive faire doute," says an apt scholar of theirs, Philip of Valois, in a decree of 1346, "que a nous et a notre majeste royale n'appartiennent seulement ... Hence, we may understand the decisive importance of the transformation of value and price of labour-power into the form of wages, or into the value and price of labour itself. In many places the self-acting minders ranged from 5s. The limit of this change is given by the altered value of labour-power. They become rough, foul- mouthed boys, before Nature has taught them that they are women. Danielson (Niko- lai — on) in his letter of November 28, 1878, the part of this paragraph which begins with the words "Strange optical illusion" and ends with the words "inherent necessity" should read as follows: "Mr. Mill is willing to con- cede that it is not absolutely necessary for it to be so, even under an eco- nomic system where the labourers and capitalists are separate classes." — Note by the Institute of Marxism-Leninism in the Russian edition. There is a physical relation between physical things. in the University of Oxford.) "A History of Agriculture and Prices in England." Oxford, 1866, v. 2 These fetters vanished with the dissolution of feudal society, with the expropriation and partial eviction of the country population. 4 See "Reports of Insp. The seller has his commodity replaced by gold, the buyer has his gold replaced by a commodity. 4d.; their total income, £36 2s.; deficit made 1 Dr. Richard Price: "Observations on Reversionary Payments," 6th Ed. By W. the object of the former is something different from money, of the latter the augmenta- tion of money.... The boys' work is of a kind for which the strength of the boys is generally ('generally,' of course not always) quite sufficient, and consequently there would be no gain in the greater strength of the men to counterbalance the loss, or it would be only in the few cases in which the metal is heavy. 150. 17.) 2 "Le travail des Compagnons-artisans sera regie a la journge ou a la piece... 40.) * Friedrich Engels, 1. Being limited by the physical properties of the commodity, it has no existence apart from that commodity. 3,467,659 . the health of the workpeople was sacrificed, and the race in a few generations must have degenerated. This observation as to the willingness to work over-time is especially applicable to the women employed as weavers and reelers." ("Rept. 165, 166.) 3 Machine printing also economises colour. A bedroom in which were 4 adults and 4 children; 11 feet long, 9 feet broad, 6 feet 5 inches high at its highest part; another 11 feet 3 inches by 9 feet, 5 feet 10 inches high, sheltered 6 persons. 2 Science, generally speaking, costs the capitalist nothing, a fact that by no means hinders him from exploiting it. The victory of the nobility in the peasants' war put an end to that. As the taste of the porridge does not tell you who grew the oats, no more does this simple process tell you of itself what are the social conditions under which it is taking place, wheth- er under the slave-owner's brutal lash, or the anxious eye of the capitalist, whether Cincinnatus carries it on in tilling his modest farm or a savage in killing wild animals with stones. In other print works the children's attendance at school is made to depend altogether upon the exigencies of the work in the establish- ment. When treating of use-value, we always assume to be dealing with definite quantities, such as dozens of watches, yards of linen, or tons of iron. 1st, The journeymen are miserable in winter for want of work, the mercers and master- weavers not daring to lay out their stocks to keep the journeymen employed before the spring comes, and they know what the fashion will then be: 2ndly, In the spring the journeymen are not sufficient, but the master-weavers must draw in many prentices, that they may supply the trade of the kingdom in a quarter or half a year, which robs the plough of hands, drains the country of labourers, and in a great part stocks the city with beggars, and starves some in winter that are ashamed to beg." ("Essays about the Poor, Manufac- tures, &c," p. And, as the substances consumed by the capitalists and their dependants become more plentiful, so too do these orders of society. 49 v. For it origi- nated for the exchange of commodities, but interest makes out of money, more money. It is the natural property of living labour, to transmit old value, whilst it creates new. It is then, the money-commodity, nei- ther merely ideal, as in its function of a measure of value, nor capable of being represented, as in its function of circulating medium. From the above table it results:-^ THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 699 Horses Cattle Sheep Pigs Absolute Decrease Absolute Decrease Absolute Increase Absolute Increase 72,358 116,626 146,608 28.819 1 Let us now turn to agriculture, which yields the means of subsistence for cattle and for men. On the other hand, the £3,000, the money-value of the machine, expresses all the labour expended on its production, no matter in what proportion this labour con- stitutes wages for the workman, and surplus-value for the capital- ist. Engels: "The English Ten Hours' Bill." (In the "iNeue Rheinische Zeitung, Politisch-cekonomische Revue." Edited by K. The law-makers were so far from wishing to trench on the freedom of capital to exploit adult labour-power, or, as they called it, "the freedom of labour," that they created a special system in order to prevent the Factory Acts from having a con- sequence so outrageous. 1 The State puts in circulation bits of paper on which their various denominations, say £1, £5, &c, are printed. The same holds 1 "The price of labour is the sum paid for a given quantity of labour." (Sir Edward West, "Price of Corn and Wages of Labour." London, 1826, p. So that every art, trade, or engine, doing work with labour of fewer hands, and consequently cheaper, begets in others a kind of necessity and emulation, either of using the same art, trade, or engine, or of inventing something like it, that every maD may be upon the square, that no man may be able to undersell his neighbour." ("The Advantages of the East India Trade to England." London, 1720, p. But this is impossible without an increase in the productiveness of labour. Early marriage and the operation of the various laws of settlement affect the one as enlistment and the Mutiny Act affect the other." (Dr. Hunter, 1. He, like all other buyers, seeks to get the greatest possible benefit out of the use-value of his commod- ity. of Fact.," April 30th, 1848, p. Senior at the seventh annual con- gress of "The National Association for the Promotion of Social Science." in "Report of Proceedings, &c," Lond. For the rest, in respect to the phenomenal form, "value and price of labour," or "wages," as contrasted with the essential relation manifested therein, viz., the value and price of labour-power, the same difference holds that holds in respect to all phenomena and their hidden substratum. Another case more horrible had come to hisknowledge while on a[Parliamentary] Committee ... For them there consequently exists neither value, nor magnitude of value, anywhere except in its expression by means of the exchange- relation of commodities, that is, in the daily list of prices current. . Quand vous mettez un homme dans le vide, vous vous emparez de l'atmospbere. 1 In every country in which the capitalist mode of production reigns, it is the custom not to pay for labour-power before it has been exercised for the period fixed by the contract, as for example, the end of each week. While the shelter holds together, the labourer is per- mitted to rent it, and glad enough he will often be to do so, even at the price of decent lodging. x The lowest sediment of the relative surplus-population finally dwells in the sphere of pauperism. Add to this the low wages for the enormous exploitation of mature and immature labour-power. If half a day's average social labour is incor- porated in three shillings, then three shillings is the price corre- sponding to the value of a day's labour-power. . Let us see, in the first place, what the two forms have in common. MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 431 Division of labour specialises this labour-power, by reducing it to skill in handling a particular tool. In this way it is possible with an increasing productiveness of labour, for the price of labour-power to keep on falling, and yet this fall to be accompanied by a constant growth in the mass of the labourer's means of subsistence. It might thus as well have been submerged under the waters of the German Ocean.... IV. Age 25-35. But since cap- ital is by nature a leveller, since it exacts in every sphere of production equality in the conditions of the exploitation of labour, the limitation by law of children's labour, in one branch of in- dustry, becomes the cause of its limitation in others. After doing that, there is given to the owner 20 days to look over the matter; at the end of 20 days he has the power to refuse making any alteration in the mine; but, when he refuses, the mine-owner writes to the Home Secretary, at the same time nominating five engineers, and from those five engineers named by the mine- owner himself, the Home Secretary appoints one, I think, as ar- bitrator, or appoints arbitrators from them; now we think in that case the mine-owner virtually appoints his own arbitrator." (n. This property of a commodity is independent of the amount of labour required to appropriate its useful qualities. In Manufacture, on the contrary, the turning out of a given quantum of product in a given time is a technical law of the process of production itself. Plato's Republic, in so far as division of labour is treated in it, as the formative principle of the State, is merely the Athenian idealisation of the Egyptian system of castes, Egypt having served as the model of an industrial country to many of his contemporaries also, amongst others to Isocrates, 2 and it dinate. Hume); because he told the world how "Hume amused him- self on his deathbed with Lucian and Whist," and because be even had the impudence to write of Hume: "I have always considered him both in his life-time and since his death, as approaching as nearly to the idea of a per- fectly wise and virtuous man, as, perhaps, the nature of human frailty will permit." The bishop cries out, in a passion: "Is it right in you. He nominally compares the life of the English and French manufacturing labourer, but in the words just quoted he is painting, as he himself confesses in his confused way, the French agri- cultural labourers. A commodity is therefore a mysterious thing, simply because in it the social character of men's labour appears to them as an objective character stamped upon the product of that labour: because the relation of the producers to the sum total of their own labour is presented to them as a social relation, existing not between themselves, but between the products of their labour. In 1851, 580 towns were distinguished, and the popula- tion in them and in the surrounding country was nearly equal. Dye stuffs and other auxiliary substances also vanish but re-appear as properties of the product. At the time of the 10 hours' agitation, the masters cried out that the work- ing mob petitioned in the hope of obtaining 12 hours' wages for 10 hours' work. spects analogous, the necessary labour-time is different. With a given length of this work- ing-day, whether its limits are fixed physically or socially, the mass of surplus-value can only be increased by increasing the num- ber of labourers, i.e., of the labouring population. Just as the coat in its bodily form became a direct expression of value, so now does tailoring, a concrete form of labour, appear as the direct and palpable embodiment of human labour generally. Thus are the- virtues, the peculiar virtues of the female character to be per- verted to her injury— thus all that is most dutiful and tender in her nature is made a means of her bondage and suffering." (Ten Hours' Factory Bill. We see that only against its will and under the pressure of the LEGISLATION AGAINST THE EXPROPRIATED 741 masses did the English Parliament give up the laws against Strikes and Trades' Unions, after it had itself, for 500 years, held, with shameless egoism, the position of a permanent Trades' Union of the capitalists against the labourers. m., including -j an hour for breakfast, and an hour for dinner, and thus leaving 10 y working-hours, and 8 hours for Saturday, from 6 a. In proportion as machinery, with the aid of a relatively small number of workpeople, increases the mass of raw mate- rials, intermediate products, instruments of labour, &c, the work- ing-up of these raw materials and intermediate products becomes split up into numberless branches; social production increases in diversity. While hoarding, as a distinct mode of acquiring riches, vanishes with the progress of civil so- ciety, the formation of reserves of the means of payment grows with that progress. EXPORT OF WOOL FROM INDIA TO GREAT BRITAIN. In the former case the capitalist squanders the whole surplus-value in dissipation, in the latter he demonstrates his bourgeois virtue by consuming only a portion of it and converting the rest into money. 2 He cries out against this usurping attempt to lay taxes on the advance of industry, and declares roundly that the productiveness of labour does not concern the labourer at all. 2,906,274 No. 54,247 Acres. 5. Nevertheless, we must examine this tautology a little more closely. dwindled to eight or ten. -+-£90 var. The great production of surplus-value in these branches of labour, and the progressive cheapening of their articles, were and are chiefly due to the minimum wages paid, no more than requisite for a miserable vegetation, and to the extension of work- ing-time up to the maximum endurable by the human organism. 3 In place of the pompous cata- logue of the "inalienable rights of man" comes the modest Magna Charta of a legally limited working-day, which shall make clear "when the time which the worker sells is ended, and when his own begins." 4 Quantum mutatus ab illo! 1 "The proceedings (the manoeuvres of capital, e.g., from 1848-50) have afforded, moreover, incontrovertible proof of the fallacy of the asser- tion so often advanced, that operatives need no protection, but may be consid- ered as free agents in the disposal of the only property which they possess— the labour of their hands and the sweat of their brows." (Reports, &c, for April 30th, 1850, p. 4 The Northamptonshire manufacturer commits a pious fraud, par- donable in one whose heart is so full. Lastly, we divide the sum thus obtained by the number of labourers to find out again how much may come to each on the average. * Since the production and the circulation of commodities are the general pre-requisites of the capitalist mode of production, division of labour in manufacture demands, that division of labour in society at large should previously have attained a certain de- gree of development. as a main governing condition in the household circumstances of agricultural la- bour .... On the one hand, the process of production incessant- ly converts material wealth into capital, into means of creating more wealth and means of enjoyment for the capitalist. Dividendosi in tal maniera per la comune e privata uti- lita gli uomini in varie classi e condizioni." (Cesare Beccaria: "Elementi di Econ. Such desolation, such hopelessness was about these people and their little room, as I should not care to witness again. Effects, in their turn, become causes, and the varying accidents of the whole process, which always reproduces its own conditions, take on the form of periodicity. as fat lubricates the motion of the muscles, feeds in want of victuals, fills up the uneven cavities and beautifies the body; so doth money in the state quicken its action, leeds irom abroad in time of dearth at home; evens accounts ... The Venetian monk Ortes, one of the great economic writers of the 18th century, regards the antagonism of capitalist produc- tion as a general natural law of social wealth. d. Hence exchange-value appears to be something accidental and purely relative, and consequently an intrinsic value, i.e., an exchange-value that is inseparably connected with, inherent in commodities, seems a contradiction in terms. By the 6 hours' spinning, the value of the raw material preserved and transferred to the product is six times as great as before, although the new value added by the labour of the spinner to each pound of the very same raw material is one-sixth what it was formerly. 95, 96.) 2 "Money ... The rise in the price of cotton during a period of feverish activity, had induced the manufacturers in Blackburn to shorten, by mutual consent, the working-time in their mills during a cer- tain fixed period. Comm., Ill Rep.," p 13, n 144, p. 1 Between 1852 and 1862, considerable extension of the English woollen manufacture took place, while the number of hands employed in it remained almost stationary, showing how greatly the introduc- tion of new machines had superseded the labour of preceding periods. The buildings in which they work, the store-houses for the raw mate- rial, the implements and utensils used simultaneously or in turns by the workmen; in short, a portion of the. Ducpetiaux, inspector- general of Belgian prisons and charitable institutions, and mem- ber of the central commission of Belgian statistics. The public— e.g., at the Dub- lin meeting in May, 1860 — took their part with Irish warmth. means of production, are now consumed in common. The sheep are driven from, and then the deer driven to, the naked hills, and then it is called a deer-forest. Sir, to hold up to our view as 'perfectly wise and virtuous,' the character and conduct of one, who seems to have been possessed with an incurable antipathy to all that is called Religion; and who strained every nerve to explode, suppress and extirpate the spirit of it among men, that its very name, if he could effect it, might no more be had in remembrance?" (1. * We therefore save ourselves a superfluous operation, and simplify our analysis, by the assumption, that the labour of the workman employed by the capitalist is unskilled average labour. . There would no longer be any standard. Rep.," p. Richard Jones." Hertford, 1852. This double character arises from the nature of the ar- ticle produced. The manufactures of this class owed their origin chiefly to the capitalist's need of having at hand an army ready equipped to meet any increase of de- mand. And for the present it interests us just as little. c, p. If, in a society with capitalist production, anarchy in the so- cial division of labour and despotism in that of the workshop are mutual conditions the one of the other, we find, on the contrary, in those earlier forms of society in which the separation of trades has been spontaneously developed, then crystallised, and finally made permanent by law, on the one hand, a specimen of the organi- sation of the labour of society, in accordance with an approved and authoritative plan, and on the other, the entire exclusion of divi- DIVISION OF LABOUR AND MANUFACTURE 357 sion of labour in the workshop, or at all events a mere dwarf- like or sporadic and accidental development of the same. But first, one word on official pauperism, or on that part of the working-class which has forfeited its condition of existence (the sale of labour-power), and vegetates upon public alms. 1 1. And if I offered to explain to them the meritorious nature of my action in inverting the order of succession, they would probably point out to me that I was mistaken as to that order of succession, and that the whole transaction, instead of beginning with a purchase and ending with a sale, began, on the contrary, with CONTRADICTIONS IN THE FORMULA OF CAPITAL 157 a sale and was concluded with a purchase. One house let for 8d. But at the same time it creates the material conditions for a higher synthesis in the future, viz., the union of agriculture and industry on the basis of the more perfected forms they have each acquired during their temporary separation. THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 665 graceful. They give regular and official statistics of the capitalistic greed for surplus-labour. The unit-measure for time-wages, the price of the working- hour, is the quotient of the value of a day's labour-power, divided by the number of hours of the average working-day. It is the only original bit of value formed during this process, the only portion of the value of the product created by this process. It is not the capitalist whose skin he tans. Such are air, virgin soil, uatural meadows, &c. 253, 254. 443, 444.) "Do the men take a great interest in this question (of edu- cation)?" "The majority of them do." (n. Holland, which first fully developed the colonial system, in 1648 stood already in the acme of its commer- cial greatness. 56-57.) The Factory Inspectors remarked on the supple- mentary law of 1860, torn from these open-air bleachers: "The Act has not only failed to afford that protection to the workers which it appears to offer, but contains a clause ... The population can therefore barely maintain its numbers." Thus in Cardiganshire: 1851. In the eyes of each other we are nothing but exchange-values. to 6 p. 88, 89.) 156 CHAPTER V CONTRADICTIONS IN THE GENERAL FORMULA OF CAPITAL The form which circulation takes when money becomes capi- tal, is opposed to all the laws we have hitherto investigated bearing on the nature of commodities, value and money, and even of circulation itself. . The value which the labour-power produces is, on the other hand, 6s., because it, in fact, functions during 12 hours, and the value it pro- duces depends, not on its own value, but on the length of time it is in action. — Ed. 2 The Factory Acts Extension Act was passed on August 12, 1867. In Egypt, on the contrary, every artificer is severely punished if he meddles with affairs of State, or carries on several trades at once. 25 708 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION "The towns have had to receive from year to year what was deemed to be the surplus-labour of the rural division; 1 and then people still wonder "there is still a surplus of labour in the towns and villages, and either a scarcity or a threatened scarcity in some of the country divisions." 2 The truth is that this want only becomes perceptible "in harvest-time, or during spring, or at such times as agricultural operations are carried on with astivity; at other periods of the year many hands are idle;" 3 that "from the digging out of the main crop of potatoes in October until the early spring following . Mark Wilks: "Historical Sketches of the South of India.'* Lond., 1810-17, v. Here and there, but in any case only for a time, an industry may be carried on, on a small scale, by means of me- chanical power. They manifest themselves therefore as commodities, or have the form of com- modities, only in so far as they have two forms, a physical or natural form, and a value-form. 4 Thus was laid the foundation of capitalistic production in this trade, of the unlimited extension of the working-day and of night-labour, although the latter only since 1824 gained a se- rious footing, even in London. that form its constant part, is COn- tained in i^ths of the product or in 16 lbs. . . I could saie somewhat." The complaints of these old chroniclers are always exaggerated, but they reflect faithfully the impression made on contempcraries by the revolution in the conditions of production. On the other hand, it arises from the co-operation of artificers of one handicraft; it splits up that partic- ular handicraft into its various detail operations, isolating, and making these operations independent of one another up to the point where each becomes the exclusive function of a particular la- bourer. 127. So too r on the other hand, the revolution in cotton-spinning called forth the invention of the gin, for separating the seeds from 1 The power-loom was at first made chiefly of wood; in its improved mod- ern form it is made of iron. Erster Band Berlin, 1858, p. x It is only the common product of all the detail labour- ers that becomes a commodity. . The rules of the guilds, as I have said before, by limiting most strictly the number of apprentices and journeymen that a single master could employ, prevented him from becoming a capitalist. On a tray in front of the fire lay a quantity of oakum, which the wife and children were picking in return for their allowance from the parish. Nevertheless, with the fall in numbers of the population, rents and farmers' profits rose, although the latter not as steadily as the former. . 3 Hence legislation in various countries fixes a maximum for labour- contracts. Still, such a return to handicrafts is but a transition to the factory system, which, as a rule, makes its ap- pearance so soon as the human muscles are replaced, for the purpose of driving the machines, by a mechanical motive power, such as steam or water. The additional capital annually transported abroad to be put out at interest is in much greater proportion to the annual accumulation than the yearly emigration is to the yearly increase of population. Adam bit the apple, and thereupon sin fell on the human race. The other classes perish and disappear in the face of Modern Industry, the proletariat is its special and essential product... Fairbairn discovered several very important 'applications of ma- chinery to the construction of machines, in consequence of strikes in his own workshops. exchange for that quantity of capital which had been produced by the same amount of labour; antecedent labour would ... 2 Capital that has such good reasons for denying the sufferings of the legions of workers that surround it, is in practice moved as much and as little by the sight of the coming degradation and final depopulation of the human race, as by the probable fall of the earth into the sun. In the sphere of agriculture, modern industry has a more revolutionary effect than elsewhere, for this reason, that it anni- hilates the peasant, that bulwark of the old society, and replaces him by the wage-labourer. No doubt, the expression 20 yards of linen=l coat, or 20 yards of linen are worth 1 coat, implies the opposite relation: 1 coat =20 yards of linen, or 1 coat is worth 20 yards of linen. Compared with the beds, the house does represent something equal to them, in so far as it represents what is really equal, both in the beds and the house. They are most admirable as a temporary relief; but if they were constantly in action, effects of a similar kind would result from them, as from the population of a country being pushed to the very extreme limits of its food." (Malthus: "Inquiry into the Nature and Progress of Rent," Lond., 1815, p. 3 The Co- 1 In consequence of the great demand for cotton alter 1861, the pro- duction of cotton, in some thickly populated districts of India, was extend- ed at the expense of rice cultivation. I., ch. Whilst a large number of acres, that were for- merly tilled, lie idle or are turned permanently into grass-land, a great part of the waste land and peat bogs that were unused for- merly, become of service for the extension of cattle-breeding. He must eat, drink and sleep at word of command... Even in the last third of the 17th century, 4 / s of the English people were agricultural. But we do not think that any line could be drawn over the age of 12, at which boys could be dispensed with for night-work. 108, 4 George Read, 1. For simplicity's sake we shall henceforth account every kind of labour to be unskilled, simple labour; by this we do no more than save ourselves the trouble of making the reduction. Moreover, there is here no question of service. Even the Reign of Terror left it un- touched. The capital advanced is consequently reduced from c-fv to v, and instead of the value of the product (c+v)+s we have now the value produced (v-j-s). £.] 724 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION legal etiquette. All that concerns it is simply and solely the maximum of labour-power, that can be rendered fluent in a working-day. The latter, indeed, gains adequate manifestation in the totality of its mani- fold, particular, concrete forms. If I sell a quarter of corn for £3, and with this £3 buy clothes, the money, so far as I am concerned, is spent and done with. P., and less than 20 H. of Pol. Sometimes I come at 4. If, on the other hand, the value of the coat sinks by one-half, then 20 yards of linen =2 coats. Answer: "La valeur d'une chose exprimee en monnaie." And why has "le travail de la terre ... "It is a common practice with the coal masters to pay once a month, and advance cash to their workmen at the end of each intermediate week. 2 Though a use-value, in the form of a product, issues from the labour-process, yet other use-values, products of previous labour, enter into it as means of production. Report." Evidence 173, p. At that time good wages could be earned. "If you allow me," said a highly respectable master to me, "to work only ten minutes in the day over-time, you put one thousand a year in my pocket." 1 "Moments are the elements of profit." 2 Nothing is from this point of view more characteristic than the designation of the workers who work full time as "full-timers," and the children under 13 who are only allowed to work 6 hours as "half-timers." The worker is here nothing more than personi- fied labour-time. This is the great secret of "systematic colonisation." By this plan, Wakefield cries in triumph, "the supply of labour must be constant and regular, be- cause, first, as no labourer would be able to procure land until he had worked for money, all immigrant labourers, working for a time for wages and in combination, would produce capital for the employment of more labourers; secondly, because every labourer who left off working for wages and became a landowner, would, by purchasing land, provide a fund for bringing fresh labour to the colony." 3 The price of the soil imposed by the State must, of course, be a "sufficient price" — i.e., so high "as to prevent the labourers from becoming independent landowners until others had followed to take their place." 4 This "sufficient price for the land" is nothing but a euphemistic circumlocution for the ran- 1 1. This narrowness is reflected in the ancient worship of Nature, and in the other elements of the popular reli- gions. Now let us examine the circuit M— C— M a little closer. un effort constant pour regis- ter a la tentation de le consommer." (Courcelle-Seneuil, 1. How can that be expected from a man who has been at such work for 29 or 30 hours, exposed to the weather, and without rest. "Yet the total labour, that produced each single pair of stockings ... 11,722,182 yds. It brings forth living offspring, or, at the least, lays golden eggs. Economy does, it is, in any case, "very remarkable" that he should make Mr. John Stuart Mill the first propounder of a theory which was first published by James Anderson in A. Only a man with such atrocious want of the critical faculty and such spurious erudition deserved, in spite of his Protectionist heresy, to become the secret source of the harmonious wisdom of a Bastiat, and of all the other Free-trade optimists of to-day. Good heavens! a nation divided into agricultural and commercial interests, calling itself sane; nay, styling itself enlightened and civilised, not only in spite of, but in consequence of this monstrous and unnatural division." (David Urquhart, 1. But, then, changed into gold, it completes its own second and final metamorphosis, and helps at the same time to accomplish the first metamorphosis of a third commodity. . While within the workshop, the iron law of proportionality subjects definite num- bers of workmen to definite functions, in the society outside the workshop, chance and caprice have full play in distributing the producers and their means of production among the various branches of industry. But the money itself is only one of the two forms of value. c, p. This relation has no natural basis, neither is its social basis one that is common to all historical periods. 1853.— 1 in 28. The former determines the exchange-value of the la- bour-power, the latter is its use-value. 192 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION seen before to what results such asceticism leads. The latter pre-supposes that the working-day is already divided into 'wo parts, necessary labour, and surplus-labour. the Parliamentary Return "Factories Regulation Act" (6th August, 1859), and in it Leonard Horner's "Suggestions for amending the Factory Acts to enable the Inspectors to prevent illegal working, now becoming very prevalent." 3 "Children of the age of 8 years and upwards, have, indeed, been em- ployed from 6 a. How far it has been intended, in the English constitution and law, that this kind of unconditional property in land should be acquirable, and that a landlord, 'doing as he wills with his own,' should be able to treat the cultivators of the soil as aliens, whom he may expel from his territory, is a ques- tion which I do not pretend to discuss .... 544 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION money for the same quantity of labour. of Insp. The weekly cost of food per adult, gave the following average figures; silk-weavers 2s. 2 "Gh. Empl. DIVISION OF LABOUR AND MANUFACTURE 349 with another during the progress of production, lay claim to him in various ways. On the other hand, the number and extent of his so-called necessary wants, as also the modes of satisfying them, are them- selves the product of historical development, and depend there- fore to a great extent on the degree of civilisation of a country, more particularly on the conditions under which, and consequent- ly on the habits and degree of comfort in which, the class of free labourers has been formed. (The Rev. go to 3 waste. Every one knows, if he knows nothing else, that commodities have a value-form common to them all, and presenting a marked contrast with the varied bodily forms of their use-values. In the labour-process, therefore, man's activity, with the help of the instruments of labour, effects an alteration, designed from the commencement, in the material worked upon. The completion of its first metamorphosis follows only at a later period. Ill Report, 1864," p. Arkwright's throstle-spinning mill was from the very first turned by water. of yarn, o having a value of 30s. The body of the commodity that serves as the equivalent, figures as the materialisation of human labour in the abstract, and is at the same time the product of some specifically useful concrete labour. They lose two or three days, and then work all night to make it up.... of cotton+the value of a whole spindle, i.e., if the same working-time is required to produce the commodities on either side of this equation, then 10 lbs. Econ." London, 1853, p. He adds that he does not know all the methods, and does not mention all that he knows. It produces also the premature exhaustion and death of this labour-power itself. Polit." 3eme ed. Thus his gain is — Belore 6 a. Capital only speaks of the system in its "normal" form. Rep., 1864," p. It means only this, that many millions of workpeople would be required to replace the spinning machinery. The progress consists in this alone, that the character of direct and universal exchangeability— in other words, that the universal equivalent form — has now, by social custom, be- come finally identified with the substance, gold. All their housholde stuffe, which is very little woorthe, thoughe it might well abide the sale: yet beeynge sodainely thruste owte, they be constrayned to sell it for a thing of nought. m., to make every "young person," and "every child" begin, break off, resume, or end his 12 or 8 hours at any mo- ment they liked, and also permitted them to assign to dif- ferent persons, different times for meals, these gentlemen soon discovered a new "system of relays," by which the labour- horses were not changed at fixed stations, but were constantly re-harnessed at changing stations. — 'Ex 8tj tootcdv tcXsiu> te fxaara YifvsTai xat xdXXiov xai paov, otav zl$ fv xa?a cpomv xai iv xatpi axoX-rjv tuiv aXXu>v af<ov, rcparq)." (Rep. If, therefore, the magnitude of value advanced in wages is not merely found again in the product, but is found there augment- ed by a surplus-value, this is not because the seller has been de- frauded, for he has really received the value of his commodity; it is due solely to the fact that this commodity has been used up by the buyer. The surplus-population was absorbed.'" The Bury Guardian said, on the completion of the French treaty, that "10,000 additional hands could be absorbed by Lancashire, and that 30,000 or 40,000 will be needed." After the "flesh agents and sub-agents" had in vain sought through the agricultural districts, "a deputation came up to London, and waited on the right hon. of coffee =20 yards of linen. . Labour adds oil to the lamp of life, when thinking inflames it. But its real purport is to prove that every seller brings his buyer to market with him. . The growth of so- cial capital is effected by the growth of many individual capi- tals. 596 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION by such a process, be far more curbed in than spurred on. In so far as exchange is a process, by which commodities are transferred from hands in which they are non-use-values, to hands in which they become use-values, it is a social circulation of matter. He then seeks to explain away the mystical character of gold and silver, by sub- stituting for them less dazzling commodities, and by reciting, with ever renewed satisfaction, the catalogue of all possible com- modities which at one time or another have played the part of equivalent. 2. must be advanced in order to exploit daily 100 labour-powers, of n times 3s., in order to exploit daily n labour-powers. no man would have a motive for accumulating more capital than he could use with his own hands. We know, however, that, the values of commodities remaining constant, their prices vary with the value of gold (the material of money), rising in proportion as it falls, and falling in proportion as it rises. It has, therefore, lost value more or less. Even when times of peace came, they were doomed to complete inactivity, because the rich were in possession of the soil, and used slaves instead of freemen in the tilling of it." (Appian: "Civil Wars," I. For the expro- priation of the agricultural population creates, directly, none but great landed proprietors. Bailey, 1. Custom stamps them as values with definite magni- tudes. It is an undoubted fact that machinery, as such, is not re- sponsible for "setting free" the workman from the means of sub- sistence. 1 "We have given in our previous reports the statements of several experienced manufacturers to the effect that over-hours ... . And only the destruction of rural domestic industry can give the internal market of a country that extension and consistence which the capitalist mode of production requires. Every condition of the problem is satisfied, while the laws that regulate the exchange of commodities, have been in no way violated. tea or =40 lbs. "Memorandum by the Lord Chief Justice." Vol. In the older countries, machinery, when employed in some branches of industry, creates such a redundancy of labour in other branches that in these latter the fall of wages below the value of labour-power impedes the use of machinery, and, from the stand- point of the capitalist, whose profit comes, not from a diminution of the labour employed, but of the labour paid for, renders that use superfluous and often impossible. That second commodity is not the one whose value is expressed. by A. The various manufactures so combined form more or less separate departments of a larger manufacture, but are at the same time independent processes, each with its own divi- sion of labour. " 8 James Nasmyth, the eminent civil engineer of Patricroft, near Manchester, explained in a letter to Leonard Horner, written In 1852, the nature of the improvements in the steam-engine 1 Rep. . THE WORKING-DAY 261 of whose operations, namely, iron and heavier steel work, goes on night and day by relays, states "that in the heavier steel work one or two boys are employed to a score or two men." Their con- cern employs upwards of 500 boys under 18, of whom about -^- or 170 are under the age of 13. If we deduct from this population all who are too old or too young for work, all unproductive women, young persons and children, the "ideological" classes, such as gov- ernment officials, priests, lawyers, soldiers, &c; further, all who have no occupation but to consume the labour of others in the form of rent, interest, &c; and, lastly, paupers, vagabonds, and criminals, there remain in round numbers eight millions of the two sexes of every age, including in that number every capi- talist who is in any way engaged in industry, commerce, or finance. Of course it is impossible to spin without material and spindles; and therefore the existence of these things as products, at the commencement of the spinning operation, must be presumed: but in the process itself, the fact that they are products of previous labour, is a matter of utter indifference; just as in the digestive process, it is of no impor- tance whatever, that bread is the produce of the previous la- bour of the farmer, the miller, and the baker. to the time of George II., the history of money in England consists of one long series of perturbations caused by the clashing of the legally fixed ratio between the values of gold and silver, with the fluctuations in their real values. The immense majority of the popula- tion 1 consisted then, and to a still larger extent, in the 15th century, of free peasant proprietors, whatever was the feudal title under which their right of property was hidden. by ten prosecutions in seven magisterial divisions, and having been supported by the magistrates in one case only. A portion at least of the society must be indefatigably employed . of yarn, is, in its character of an article of utility, just as much the fabric of the spinner's labour, as the remainder of the same product, yet when viewed in this connexion, it does not contain, and has not absorbed any labour expended during the process of spinning. to 6s. But it by no means states the converse, that iron is directly exchangeable for gold. Questionable as it would seem, lo suppose that any trick of the kind would be adopted, the report has been so universal that it really deserves mention." 1 "The amount of purchases or contracts entered upon during the course of any given day, will not affect the quantity of money afloat on that partic- ular day, but, in the vast majority of cases, will resolve themselves into multifarious drafts upon the quantity of money which may be afloat at sub- sequent dates more or less distant.... 292 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION abolished." 1 A crowd of masters, who until then had been afraid of using the relay system for young persons and women, now took it up heart and soul. D or=x Com. Barbon, 1. The decrease, often by leaps and bounds in the number of children under 13 years employed in factories, a decrease that is shown in an astonishing manner by the English statistics of the last 20 years, was for the most part, according to the evidence of the factory inspectors them- selves, the work of the certifying surgeons, who overstated the age of the children, agreeably to the capitalist's greed for exploi- 1 In striking contrast with the great fact, that the shortening of the hours of labour of women and children in English factories was exacted from capital by the male operatives, we find in the latest reports of the Chil- dren's Employment Commission traits of the operative parents in relation to the traffic in children, that are truly revolting and thoroughly like slave- dealing. c, Vol. On the one hand, the exchange-val- ue of these means of production is not increased; for the exchange- value of a commodity is not raised by its use-value being consumed more thoroughly and to greater advantage. The capitalist may now be said to be the first owner of all the wealth of the com- munity, though no law has conferred on him the right to this prop- erty . Marx, 1. Momen- tarily, indeed, the value originally advanced, the £100 is distin- guishable from the surplus-value of £10 that is annexed to it during circulation; but the distinction vanishes immediately. li. It deals solely with the agricultural gang-system. Most of the silver exported to China makes its way to India. The exchange between capital and labour at first presents itself to the mind in the same guise as the buying and selling of all other commodities. The money becomes petri- fied into a hoard, and the seller becomes a hoarder of money. But money itself has no price. That the natural increase of the number of labourers does not satisfy the requirements of the accumulation of capital, and yet all the time is in excess of them, is a contradic- tion inherent to the movement of capital itself. The great majority of the labourers now "unproductive" would have to be turned into "productive" ones. After the conquest of Silesia he forced 732 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION The spoliation of the church's property, the fraudulent alien- ation of the State domains, the robbery of the common lands, the usurpation of feudal and clan property, and its transforma- tion into modern private property under circumstances of reck- the landlords to rebuild the huts, barns, etc., and to provide the peasants with cattle and implements. He says: "It may, perhaps, be worthy the attention of the public to consider, whether any manufacture, which, in order to be carried on successfully, requires that cottages and workhouses should be ransacked for poor children; that they should be em- ployed by turns during the greater part of the night and robbed of that rest which, though indispensable to all, is most required by the young; and that numbers of both sexes, of different ages and dispositions, should be collected together in such a manner that the contagion of example cannot but lead to profligacy and de- bauchery; will add to the sum of individual or national felicity?" 2 1 Mirabeau, I. . It is this, chiefly, which explains why the population of Egypt is so numerous, and, therefore, why so many great works can be undertaken." ' Never- theless the grand structures of ancient Egypt are less due to the extent of its population than to the large proportion of it that was freely disposable. 406 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION to Professor Nassau W. But the lion's share, which an inconceivably small number of land magnates in England, Scotland and Ireland swallow up of the yearly national rental, is so monstrous that the wisdom of the English State does not think fit to afford the same statistical materials about the distribution of rents as about the distribution of profits. With the advance of accu- mulation, therefore, the proportion of constant to variable capi- tal changes.  Is there any want there- fore of potters? 30. Vol. After 1833, the extension of the Asiatic markets is enforced by "destruction of the human 1 1. 3 'Tilings have an intrinsick vertue" (this is Barbon's special term lor value in use) "which in all places have the same vertue; as the loadstone to attract iron" (1. J. 48). 2 F. In the following hour and 12 minutes, the spinner produces 2 lbs. of Insp. Their business cannot wait the convenience of the workmen, for "in the various operations of singeing, washing, bleaching, mangling, calendering, and dyeing, none of them can be stopped at a given moment without risk of damage ... 3 . The same holds good for every kind of refuse resulting from a labour-process, so far at least as such refuse cannot be further employed as a means in the production of new and independent use-values. Reference to two circumstances is sufficient here. .£1,000,000 "Report from the Select Committee on the Bank Acts, July, 1858," p. 6. The quantity of food obtained by the wife and also by the children at the pe- riod of rapid growth, is in many cases, in almost every county, deficient, and particularly in nitrogen." 1 The male and female servants living with the farmers themselves are sufficiently nour- ished. To similar tender scruples of the glass manufac- turers that regular meal-times for the children are impossible because as a consequence a certain quantity of heat, radiated by the furnaces, would be 'a pure loss" or "wasted," Commissioner White makes answer. ix., n. he lives upon his coarse fare, and works hard, wherein his position is subordinate to that of the English operative." ("Rep. Now, as the proportion of the num- ber of farthings requisite in commerce is to be taken from the number of people, the frequency of their exchanges: as also, and principally, from the value of the smallest silver pieces of money; so in like manner, the propor- tion of money [gold and silver specie] requisite in our trade, is to be like- wise taken from the frequency of commutations, and from the bigness of the payments." (William Petty, "A Treatise of Taxes and Contributions." Lond. His person, or rather his pocket, is the point from which the money starts and to which it returns. 3 Mr. Peel, he moans, took with him from England to Swan River, West Australia, means of subsistence and of production to the amount of £50,000. c, p. 191,937 . Herr Vissering, Professor of Political Economy in the University of Leyden, appears to have a suspicion of this when, in his "Handboek van Praktische Staatshuishoudkunde, 1860-62," which reproduces all the plati- tudes of vulgar economy, he strongly supports handicrafts against the fac- tory system. Hamilton. 4 4 8 " 9. Thus the capitalist receives in return for his advance of the price of the labour-power, a product of the same price. The equality of all sorts of human labour is expressed objectively by their products all being equally val- ues; the measure of the expenditure of labour-power by the du- ration of that expenditure, takes the form of the quantity of value of the products of labour; and finally, the mutual relations of the producers, within which the social character of their labour affirms itself, take the form of a social relation between the prod- ucts. m. But, on the whole, machinery played that subordi- nate part which Adam Smith assigns to it in comparison with division of labour. per week. . 5. . 170 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION Such an inquiry, however, would have been foreign to the analy- sis of commodities. These huts possessed no ventilation nor drainage, and, besides, were nec- essarily over-crowded, because each occupant had to accommodate lodgers, whatever the number in his own family might be, although there were only two rooms to each tenement. How it itself originates, we need not here inquire as yet. gentleman [Mr. Villiers, President of the Poor Law Board] with a view of obtaining poor children from certain union houses for the mills of Lancashire." * 1 1. The surplus-value on the contrary is, originally, the value of a definite portion of the gross product. The defects of the expanded relative value-form are reflected in the corresponding equivalent form. In the middle, also, were little wicker-fenced spaces, like sheep pens, where in finer weather the 1 "Wholesale starvation of the London Poor. That which comes directly face to face with the possessor of money on the market, is in fact not labour, but the labourer. It is rather preserved; not by reason of any operation it under^ goes itself in the process; but because the article in which it originally exists, vanishes, it is true, but vanishes into some other article. As a result, Belgium had in 1863, as compared with 1850, nearly doubled both the amount and the value of its exports of coal, iron, &c. 2 Thus, among others, Mr. W. Hence the riddle presented by money is but the riddle presented by commodities; only it now strikes us in its most glaring form. The u:sire after hoarding is in its very nature unsatiable. 28. 2074 in "Royal Commission on Railways, Minutes," 1867.) 562 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION AVERAGE NUMBER OF SPINDLES PER FACTORY. To sell commodities above their value to such a class, is only to crib back again a part of the money previously given to it. Despite all over-work, continued day and night, despite the most shameful under-payment of the workpeople, Russian manufacture manages to vegetate only by prohibition of foreign competition. But it is by the owner of the surplus-value, by the capitalist alone, that the division is made. On the other hand, there is a continual flowing back- wards and forwards of gold and silver between the different nation- al spheres of circulation, a current whose motion depends on the ceaseless fluctuations in the course of exchange. In one word, surplus-value is convertible into capital solely because the surplus-product, whose value it is, already comprises the material elements of new capital. 648 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION separated from its recompense; it is not the same man that first works, and then reposes; but it is because the one works that the other rests. A small rise that, in the face of the enormous extension of this industry and implying a great fall proportionally in the number of labourers employed. But this prejudice was first established as a dogma by the arch- Philistine, Jeremy Bentham, that insipid, pedantic, leather- tongued oracle of the ordinary bourgeois intelligence of the 19th century.' Bentham is among philosophers what Martin Tupper is among poets. Note. . (Addition to 3rd Edi- tion.) For the explanation of this statement, which is not very clear to non- chemists, we remark that the author speaks here of the homologous series of carbon compounds, first so named by G. c, pp. On the other hand, since the difference between the magnitudes of value is purely quantitative, the money-commodity must be susceptible of merely quantita^ tive differences, must therefore be divisible at will, and equally capable of being re-united. a strong man." (ns. Their pauperism is ultimately a motive to their eviction and the chief source of their miserable housing which breaks down their last power of resistance, and makes them mere slaves of the land- ed proprietors and the farmers. The mother and one child were down with typhus when Dr. Hunter was called in. Ed. Daire. c, p. Capital is a so- cial relation of production. The value of the means of production is there- fore preserved, by being transferred to the product. Persons. The family "consists of father, mother, and four children." Of these 6 persons "four may be usefully employed the whole year through." It is assumed that "there is no sick per- son nor one incapable of work, among them," nor are there "ex- penses for religious, moral, and intellectual purposes, except a very small sum for church sittings," nor "contributions to savings banks or benefit societies," nor "expenses due to luxury or the re- sult of improvidence." The father and eldest son, however, allow themselves "the use of tobacco," and on Sundays "go to the cabaret," for which a whole 86 centimes a week are reckoned. The latter has two fundamental forms. 3 The hand nail-makers in England, e.g., have, on account of the low price of labour, to work 15 hours a day in order to hammer out their mis- erable weekly wage. Polit.," Bruxelles, 1842, p. 84, n. 290. But in this latter case, the value of each single product falls, for it costs less labour than before; in the former case, that value remains unchanged, for each article costs the same labour as before. W. The lower the wages, the higher is the proportion in which ever so insignificant a rise of them expresses itself. 2 John Bellers, I. 119, 120.) 138 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION payments balance one another, money functions only ideally as money of account, as a measure of value. In future he will buy the commodities in the market, instead of manufacturing them himself. ... The hastening of this revolution by the application of the Factory Acts to those Industries The cheapening of labour-power, by sheer abuse of the labour of women and children, by sheer robbery of every nor- mal condition requisite for working and living, and by the sheer brutality of over-work and night-work, meets at last with natural obstacles that cannot be overstepped. 110, 111. 66.) r , 2 Si Ton est force de donner pour 18 livres une quantite de telle produc- tion qui en valait 24, lorsqu'on employera ce meme argent a acheter, on aura egalement pour 18 1. The expansion of value, which is the objective basis or main-spring of the circulation M — C — M, becomes his subjec- tive aim, and it is only in so far as the appropriation of ever more and more wealth in the abstract becomes the sole motive of his operations, that he functions as a capitalist, that is, as capital personified and endowed with consciousness and a will. This you say, amounts to lly hours a day. They are nothing more than the materialisation of so many hours or so many days of so- cial labour. The method of calculating the rate of surplus-value is there- fore, shortly, as follows. The value of labour-power, i.e., the labour-time requisite to produce labour-power, deter- mines the labour-time necessary for the reproduction of that value. The remaining 2-23rds, that is, the last two of the twenty-three half-hours of every day, produce the net profit of 10 per cent. It is accordingly in the most populous countries, where there are most idle men, that it is most abundant. . 69, p. l One thing is, however, requisite; this token must have an objective social validity of its own, and this the paper symbol acquires by its forced currency. five years back, now only brings them 3s. 1 At all events, less than a natural day. (Messrs. Suppose its use-value in the labour-process to last only six days, 204 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION Then, on the average, it loses each day one-sixth of its use- value, and therefore parts with one-sixth of its value to the daily product. 20, note. In his "Rechtsphilosophie" he says: "By well educated men we understand in the first instance, those who can do everything that others do." 364 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION solely owing to a revolution in the instruments of labour. II, p. 1636.) "Why should you distinguish them (colliery boys) from other boys?" "Because I think they are an exception to the rule." (n. 27. . Married women, who work in gangs along with boys and girls, are, for a stipulated sum of money, placed at the disposal of the farmer, by a man called the "undertaker," who contracts for the whole gang. In the first phase of its circulation the commodity changes place with the money. But when we buy in order to sell, we, on the contrary, begin and end with the same thing, money, exchange-value; and thereby the movement becomes interminable. Econ.," p. J. at least . But by the alienation of all my labour-time and the whole of my work, I should be converting the substance itself, in other words, my general activity and reality, my person, into the property of another." (Hegel, "Philosophie des Rechts." Berlin, 1840, p. An increase in the quantity of use-values is an increase of material wealth. CO c^ CO O CO . He is a democratic emperor, or a kind of Pied Piper of Hamelin. It cut the paper, pasted, folded, and finished 300 in a minute. Their formulation, official recognition, and proclamation by the State, were the result of a long struggle of classes. It is therefore self-evident, to what an enormous extent the toil of the factory operative has increased during the last 10 years." 1 Although, therefore, the Factory Inspectors unceasingly and with justice, commend the results of the Acts of 1844 and 1850, yet they admit that the shortening of the hours of labour has already called forth such an intensification of the labour as is in- jurious to the health of the workman and to his capacity for work. But this transmigration takes place, as it were, behind the back of the labourer. Rep." Lond. Even if that capital was orig- inally acquired by the personal labour of its employer, it sooner or later becomes value appropriated without an equivalent, the unpaid labour of others materialised either in money or in some oth- er object. MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 461 £7 4s. But if we keep in mind the behaviour of surplus-value, this appearance of identity vanishes. In all, 42 corvee days. lis durent done chercher dans le ciel un signe apparent de son retour." (Cuvier: "Discours sur les revolutions du globe," ed. "Cours d'Econ. But for what is the commodity exchanged? 70). This circular movement, in which the same phases are continually gone through in succession, forms the circulation of capital. To employ 1,000 spinners, more raw material, spindles, &c, are, of course, required, than to employ 100. He must therefore be popular with his sub- jects, and he binds them to himself by the charms of the gipsy life under his direction. The crown lawyers, however, decided that the prescribed meal- times "must be in the interval during the working-hours, and 1 Reports, &c, for 31st October, 1848, pp 133, 134. 678 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION the products of the soil without parallel in the history of Eng- lish agriculture, plethoric rent-rolls of landlords, and growing wealth of the capitalist farmers. His inquiry ranges on the one hand over the agricultural labourers, on the other, over silk-weavers, needle-women, kid-glovers, stocking- weavers, glove-weavers, and shoemakers. of coffee. 3 The number of persons taxed were in 1864, 308,416, out of a population of 23,891,009; in 1865, 332,431 out of a popu- lation of 24,127,003. Sometimes we get a little milk as it may be. Now this idea, as far as it may affect the bravery of our troops, may be of some use; but the less the manufacturing poor have of it, certainly the better for themselves and for the State. extending it may be over two or three years, administered by special commissioners added to the Boards of Guardians in the cotton districts, under special legislative regu- lations, enforcing some occupation or labour, as a means of keep- ing up at least the moral standard of the recipients of the loan... 1 The object is carried over the same distance in a short- er time. That the sufferings of the workmen displaced by machinery are therefore as transient as are the riches of this world. upper middle class was 38 years, while the average age at death of the labouring class 1 Whilst during the last six months of 1866, 80-90,000 working peo- ple in London were thrown out of work, the Factory Report for that same half year says: "It does not appear absolutely true to say that demand will always produce supply just at the moment when it is needed. The sum total of the labour of all these private in- dividuals forms the aggregate labour of society. to 6d. 115, 116). . of Fact, for 31st Oct. But there is here a technical oneness in the whole system, owing to all the machines receiving their impulse simultaneously, and in an equal degree, from the pulsations of the common prime mover, by the intermediary of the transmitting mechanism; and this mecha- nism, to a certain extent, is also common to them all, since only particular ramifications of it branch off to each machine. c, p. One gable end was convex, the other concave, and on this last, unfor- 1 "New married couples are no edifying study for grown-up brothers and sisters: and though instances must not be recorded, sufficient data are remem- bered to warrant the remark, that great depression and sometimes death are the lot of the female participator in the offence of incest." (Dr. Hunter, 1. So far as it has value, it represents no more than a definite quantity of the average labour of society incorporated in it. For the movement, in the course of which it adds surplus-value, is its own movement, its expansion, therefore, is automatic expansion. The work was to go on between 6 a. The manufacturer in large towns could evade the law, the manufacturer in country districts could not find the people necessary for the relay system, still less for the shifting of hands from one factory to another," &c. Econ.," Lond., 1833, p. The shorter fibre of the Surat cotton and its dirty condition, the greater fragility of the thread, the substitution of all sorts of heavy ingredients for flour in sizing the warps, all these lessened the speed of the ma- chinery, or the number of the looms that could be superintended by one weaver, increased the labour caused by defects in the ma- chinery, and reduced the piece-wage by reducing the mass of the product turned off. c., p. Hence the preponderant role that the colonial sys- tem plays at that time. necessary to enable him to perform his labour ... Hitherto there is no such book. The force of facts, however, com- pelled it at last to acknowledge that modern industry, in over- turning the economic foundation on which was based the tradi- tional family, and the family labour corresponding to it, had also unloosened all traditional family ties. Some decades later, the colonial system took its revenge on the descendants of the pious pilgrim fathers, who had grown seditious in the meantime. The Committee be- lieve that any constant work beyond 12 hours a-day encroaches on the domestic and private life of the working-man, and so leads to disastrous moral results, interfering with each man's home, and the discharge of his family duties as a son, a brother, a husband, a father. Since every commodity, on becoming money, disappears as a commodi- ty, it is impossible to tell from the money itself, how it got into the hands of its possessor, or what article has been changed into it. For proof, the following extract from the official accounts of an Irish workhouse. c.) 1 "The doing of it (agricultural work) at the critical juncture is of so much the greater consequence." ("An Inquiry into the Connexion between the Present Price," &c, p. of Fact., 31st Oct., 1863," p. 1639.) "Why should education be more valuable to them than to other CAPITALIST PRODUCTION classes of lads?" "I do not know that it is more valuable; but through the over-exertion in mines there is less chance for the boys that are employed there to get education, either at Sunday schools, or at day schools." (n. If the paper money exceed its proper limit, which is the amount in gold coins of the like denomination that can actually be current, it would, apart from the danger of falling into general disrepute, represent only that quantity of gold, which, in accordance with the laws of the circulation of commodities, is required, and is alone capable of being represented by paper. 52, 53.) I quote this little work because it is a very sink of all long-ago- rotten, apologetic commonplaces. After it has made 56 days out of 12, the nominal day's work of each of the 56 corvee days is again so arranged that a portion of it must fall on the ensuing day. II faut done filer pour suppleer a ce vide ....il faut y apporter la plus grande assiduite. m. GROWING DIFFERENCE IN AMOUNT BETWEEN CAPITAL EMPLOYED AND CAPITAL CONSUMED. c, p 50.) "As the number of labourers increases, the productive power of society augments in the compound ratio of that increase, multiplied by the effects of the division of labour." (Th. Hodgskin, 1. As to its use-value, that has only MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OF COMMODITIES 105 an ideal existence, represented by the series of expressions of relative value in which it stands face to face with all other com- modities, the sum of whose uses makes up the sum of the various uses of gold. 140-146, and p. 487, p. "The device of King Henry VII.," says Bacon, in his "Essays, Civil and Moral," Essay 29, "was profound and admirable, in making farms and houses of husbandry of a stand- ard; that is, maintained with such a proportion of land unto them as may breed a subject to live in convenient plenty, and no servile condition, and to keep the plough in the hands of the owners and not mere hirelings." 2 What the capitalist system demanded was, on the other hand, a degraded and almost servile condition of the mass of the people, the transformation of them into mercen- aries, and of their means of labour into capital. of Fact, for 31st Dec, 1841.") 2 See "Judgment of Mr. J. INCOME FROM PROFITS (OVER £60) IN IRELAND 1864 £. Eden, it may be remarked in passing, is the only disciple of Adam Smith during the eighteenth century that produced any work of importance. lay ... It explains only why his necessary labour-time would be limited to one day a week. The value of the linen being given in magnitude, that proportion depends on the value of the coat. This augmentation of surplus-value is pocketed by him, whether his commodities belong or not to the class of necessary means of subsistence that participate in determining the general value of labour-power. .542 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION above the average, and the disadvantage of a labour-power below the average, affects the slave-owner; in the wage-labour system it affects the labourer himself, because his labour-power is, in the one case, sold by himself, in the other, by a third person. Sir James Steuart, his son. A single vio- lin player is his own conductor; an orchestra requires a sep- arate one. c, pp. 211.) "Do they make any attempt of the kind (for providing instruction) by having schools at night?" "There are few collieries where night schools are held, and perhaps at those collieries a few boys do go to those schools; but they are so physically exhausted that it is to no purpose that they go there." (n. Hence the length of the working-day being constant, a day's labour of increased intensity will be in- corporated in an increased value, and, the value of money remain^ ing unchanged, in more money. const. Occupying areas of from 100 up to several thousand acres, each forms a compact whole producing all it requires. The trick is how to kill two birds with one stone. 170), or as Quesnay in his "Maximes generates" puts it, "Vendre est acheter." MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OP COMMODITIES 109 alienating that of their own labour. Only now can one fully understand the effrontery of these apologists. But a particular com- modity cannot become the universal equivalent except by a social act. The surplus of the total value of the product, over the sum of the values of its con- stituent factors, is the surplus of the expanded capital over the capital originally advanced. 516 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION cause that determines the magnitude of that value. In the second part of his work Pagnini directs his polemics especially against the lawyers. But of all coun- tries England again furnishes the classical example, because it holds the foremost place in the world-market, because capital- ist production is here alone completely developed, and lastly, because the introduction of the Free-trade millennium since 1846 has cutoff the last retreat of vulgar economy. The weekly report of deaths by the Registrar-General dated 26th Feb., 1864, contains 5 cases of death from starvation. c, p. This, it is hoped, will prevent persons in distress from wanting relief, and be the means of keeping down parishes." (R. . A tremendous railway accident has hurried hundreds of passengers into another world. 45.) "Free labour (if so it may be termed) even in a free country, requires the strong arm of the law to protect it." (Reports, &c, for October 31st, 1864, p. 1 This revolution, which began in Scotland after the last rising of the followers of the Pretender, can be followed through its first phases in the writings of Sir James Steuart 2 and James Anderson. Hence the accumulation of the national debt has no more infallible measure than the successive rise in the stock of these banks, whose full development dates from the found- ing of the Bank of England in 1694. The whole of his book is a vindication of a working-day of unrestricted length; that Parliament should forbid children of 13 years to be exhausted by working 12 hours a day, reminds his liberal soul of the darkest days of the middle ages. It is a historical relation of production." (Karl Marx, "Lohnarbeit und Kapital." A. three nights, and till 9 p. m., Saturdays included, and that the workpeople there, when under English overlookers, did not supply during this time quite so much product as the English in 10 hours, but under German overlookers much less. According to the experiments of Valentin and Brunner, it appears that a healthy man gives off about 1,300 cubic inches of carbonic acid per hour; this would give about 8 ounces of solid carbon thrown off from the lungs in 24 hours. When this event happens the spinner will not be paid at the same rate for work done as he was before, but as that rate will not be diminished in the ratio of one-fifth, the improvement will augment his money earnings for any given number of hours' work," but "the foregoing statement requires a cer- tain modification.... Wake- field, "England and America." Lond., 1833, Vol. . "Well," said Dr. G., "we have got our Poor Law and it is a great instrument for giving the victory to the landlords. Machinery, like every other component of constant capital, creates no new value, but yields up its own value to the product that it serves to beget. above 18) THE GENERAL LAW OP CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 663 Company, were for the most part inhabited by well-paid labourers. "The adult operatives at this mill have been asked to work from 12 to 13 hours per day, while there are hundreds who are compelled to be idle who would willingly work partial time, in order to maintain their fami- lies and save their brethren from a premature grave through being over- worked... Oct., 1857," pp. Much straw-plaiting. e., for shortening the working-time required in the production of a commodity, it becomes in the hands of capital the most powerful means, in those industries first invaded by it, for lengthening the working-day beyond all bounds set by human nature. The old capital is reproduced in a more productive form, apart from the constant detail improvements in the instruments of la- bour already in use. If, therefore, commodity production, or one of its associated processes, is to be judged according to its own economic laws, we must consider each act of exchange by itself, apart from any connex- ion with the act of exchange preceding it and that following it. 2 The increase of the means of production and subsistence, accompanied by a relative diminution in the number of labourers, causes an increased demand for labour in making canals, rocks, tunnels, bridges, and so on, works that can only bear fruit in the far future. 2 Neither are we here concerned to know how the object satisfies these wants, whether directly as means of subsistence, or indirectly as means of production. That which to-day, e.g., in the State of Massachusetts, until recently the freest State of the North-American Republic, has been proclaimed as the statutory limit of the labour of children under 12, was in England, even in the middle of the 17th century, the normal working-day of able-bodied artisans, robust labourers, athletic blacksmiths. In time-wages the labour is measured by its immediate duration, in piece-wages by the quantity of products in which the labour has embodied itself during a given time. MACHINE RY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 437 he says: "A creation destined to restore order among the indus- trious classes. In the former case, we had the expropriation of the mass of the people by a few usurpers; in the latter, we have the expropriation of a few usurpers by the mass of the people. It is plain, however, that these changes of value are independent of the increment or surplus-value added to the value of the cot- ton by the spinning itself. The effect of this system ... This is centralisation proper, as distinct from accumulation and concentration. of Fact., 31st. The only force that brings them together and puts them in relation with each other, is the selfishness, the gain and the private interests of each. 1866," p. e., no longer immedi- ately necessary for the self-expansion of capital, either goes to the wall in the unequal contest of the old handicrafts and manufac- tures with machinery, or else floods all the more easily accessible branches of industry, swamps the labour-market, and sinks the price of labour-power below its value. But, so soon as it steps forth as a commodity, it is changed into something transcendent. c, p. Hence we see, that whether a use-value is to be regarded as raw material, as instrument of labour, or as product, this is deter- mined entirely by its function in the labour-process, by the posi- tion it there occupies: as this varies, so does its character. Suppose then, that by some inexplicable privilege, the seller is enabled to sell his commodities above their value, what is worth 100 for 110, in which case the price is nominally raised 10%. to 36 lbs. The additional capitals formed in the normal course of accu- mulation (see Chapter XXIV, Section 1) serve particularly as vehicles for the exploitation of new inventions and discoveries, and industrial improvements in general. The same bourgeois mind which praises division of labour in the workshop, life-long annexation of the labourer to a partial operation, and his complete subjection to capital, as being an organisation of labour that increases its productiveness — that same bourgeois mind denounces with equal vigour every conscious attempt to socially control and regulate the process of production, as an inroad upon such sacred things as the rights of property, freedom and unrestricted play for the bent of the individual capitalist. 4. Its relative value may remain constant, although its value varies; and finally, simultaneous variations in the magnitude of value and in that of its relative expression by no means necessarily correspond in amount. 59. 63.) 1 So much then for Proudhon's wonderful idea: he "construes" machin- ery not as a synthesis of instruments of labour, but as a synthesis of detail operations for the benefit of the labourer himself. The child of 12 takes care of the little children all the day, and we get nothing till breakfast at eight. If the value of labour-power be 3 shillings, and the necessary labour-time amount to 6 hours, if the surplus-value likewise be 3 shillings, and the surplus-labour 6 hours, then if the pro- ductiveness of labour were doubled without altering the ratio of necessary labour to surplus-labour, there would be no change of magnitude in surplus-value and price of labour-power. The expanded relative value-form is, however, nothing but the sum of the elementary relative expressions or equations of the first kind, such as 20 yards of linen=l coat 20 yards of linen=10 lbs. The subsequent publication of Rodbertus' letters to Rud. (And not only for others, without more. From Dr. Harvey, of St. George's Hospital, who, on private professional business, visited Wing during the time of the epidemic, I re- ceived information exactly in the sense of the above report. It may be remembered that Schedule D (profits with the exception of those of farmers), in- cludes also the so-called, "professional" profits— i.e., the incomes of lawyers, doctors, &c; and the Schedules C. Let us make the opposite assumption, that the buyer has the privilege of purchasing commodities under their value. 38 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION but as exchange-values they are merely different quantities, and consequently do not contain an atom of use-value. one foot in one minute, and reckons the cost of one horse-power from a steam-engine to be 3d., and from a horse to be 5J/ 2 d. This House will hardly be- lieve it, but I tell them, that this traffic in human flesh was as well kept up, they were in effect as regularly sold to these [Man- chester] manufacturers as slaves are sold to the cotton-grower in the United States In 1860, 'the cotton trade was 1 John Ward: "The Borough of Stoke-upon-Trent," London, 1843, p. 13). In this sense it is that surplus-labour can be called unpaid labour. concept of value. He no more receives market-price for his work than does the soldier. It was just now the height of the season. the MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OF COMMODITIES 127 without value, such as paper notes, can serve as coins in its place. Men's wants increase or diminish with the severity or temperateness of the climate they live in; consequently, the proportion of trade which the inhabitants of different countries are obliged to carry on through necessity cannot be the same, nor is it practicable to ascertain the degree of variation farther than by the degrees of Heat and Cold; from whence one may make this general conclu- sion, that the quantity of labour required for a certain number of people is greatest in cold climates, and least in hot ones; for in the former men not only want more clothes, but the earth more cultivating than in the latter." ("An Essay on the Governing Causes of the Natural Rate of Interest." Lond. our manufactures, and everything else, will soon become so moderate as to turn the balance of trade in our favour, and thereby fetch the money back again." (1. M. Let the Government put upon the virgin soil an artificial price, independent of the law of supply and demand, a price that compels the immigrant to work a long time for wages before he can earn enough money to buy land, and turn himself into an independent peasant. "Does there appear to be any desire on the part MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 497 of the employers that the boys should have such hours as to enable them to go to school?" "No; the hours are never shortened for that purpose." (n. Everyone knows that a cotton spinner, who, reckoning the percentage on the whoie of his applied capital, employs much constant and little variable capital, does not, on account of this, pocket less profit or surplus-value than a baker, who relatively sets in motion much variable and little constant capital. From the standpoint of modern mechanical industry, this necessity stands forth as a characteristic and costly disadvantage, and one that is immanent in the principle of manufacture. It is every bit as important, for a correct understanding of surplus-value, to conceive it as a mere congelation of surplus labour-time, as nothing but materialised surplus-labour, as it is, for a proper comprehension of value, to conceive it as a mere congelation of so many hours of labour, as nothing but materialised labour. c. In Part IV. 1. The commodity is always in the hands of the seller; the money, as a means of purchase, always in the hands of the buyer. Looked at in this way, exchange is for him simply a private transaction. The division of labour, as carried out in Manufacture, not only simplifies and multiplies the qualitatively different parts of the social collective labourer, but also creates a fixed mathemati- cal relation or ratio which regulates the quantitative extent of those parts — i.e., the relative number of labourers, or the relative size of the group of labourers, for each detail operation. It remained unaltered until June, 1844. 1767, t. 9, 11. Four Justices sat, among them three cotton-spinners, at their head this same inevitable Eskrigge. Besides, there were still in Bradford, in 1861, 1,751 uninhabited houses. I, p. . 1., pp. 13.) "What if we have too much coin? Paris, 1857, p. Manufacture produced the machinery, by means of which Modern Industry abolished the handicraft and manufacturing systems in those spheres of production that it first seized upon. 1860.-20,214,173 lbs. This we learn from a remark- able statute which runs thus: 'That all vagrants shall be branded, &c.'" 1. The rea- son is, that a body of men working in concert has hands and eyes both before and behind, and is, to a certain degree, omnipresent. The gang-master goes from one farm to another, and thus employs his gang from 6 to 8 months in the year. However narrow his own views may have been, yet, that he laid his finger on some serious defects in the Ricardian Theory, is proved by the animosity with which he was attacked by Ricardo's followers. By how much? Again, since the value of the yarn produced in 2 hours, is equal to the sum of the values of his wages and of your net profit, the measure of the 1 3 value of this yarn must be 11-^- working-hours, of which 5-t- hours measure the value of the yarn produced in the last hour but one, 3 and 5-t- , the value of the yarn produced in the last hour. * Therefore, it is with the advent of machinery, that the workman for the first time brutally revolts against the instruments of labour. c, p. To be subject to these influences is a degrada- tion which must become deeper and deeper for those on whom it continues to work. 285.) DIVISION OF LABOUR AND MANUFACTURE 359 chant could buy every kind of commodity, but labour as a commod- ity he could not buy. This power is developed gratuitously, whenever the workmen are placed under given con- ditions, and it is capital that places them under such conditions. 7d., kid-glovers 2s. c, t. If the hour's wage is fixed so that the capitalist does not bind himself to pay a day's or a week's wage, but only to pay wages for the hours during which he chooses to employ the labourer, he can employ him for a shorter time than that which is originally the basis of the calculation of the hour-wage, or the unit-measure of the price of labour. even in some instances . The one is peculiar to the object as such, the other is not, as a sandal which may be worn, and is also exchangeable. Though the necessary labour-time was constant, we saw, on the other hand, that the total working-day was variable. It both reproduces the equivalent of its own value-, and also produces an excess, a surplus-value, which may itself vary, may be more or less according to circumstances. 20.) MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 403 b. It frequently happens that he finds has gone too fast, that breakages and bad work more than counterbalance the increased speed, and that he is obliged to slack- en his pace. . This our friend Robinson soon learns by experience, and having rescued a watch, ledger, and pen and ink from the wreck, commences, like a true-born Briton, to keep a set of books. Hence, a relative decrease in the number of hands is consistent with an actual increase. The world would still be without rail- ways if it had had to wait until accumulation had got a few indi- vidual capitals far enough to be adequate for the construction of a railway. The whole farce is too characteristic of the spirit of capital, not to call for a few extracts from this Report. The constantly increasing amount of capital invested in sewing- machines, 4 gives the spur to the production of, and gluts the markets with, machine-made articles, thereby giving the signal to the domestic workers for the sale of their machines. The sale of the linen, G— M, is at the same time its purchase, M— G. Newcastle-on-Tyne, as the centre of a coal and iron district of growing productiveness, takes the next place after London in the housing inferno. So soon as that shortening becomes compulsory, machinery be- comes in the hands of capital the objective means, systemati- cally employed for squeezing out more -labour in a given time. or fall to 2s. For instance, the foot is merely the prime mover of the spinning-wheel, while the hand, working with the spindle, and drawing and twisting, performs the real operation of spinning. And does not this labour, too, create value?" His overlooker and his manager try to hide their smiles. 2 Price is the money-name of the labour realised in a commodity. How long a time? On the side of material, as it functions in the process of production, all capital is divided into means of production and living labour-power. We have a King (told it is a Queen), they call her the Princess Alexandra. 5 1 "Small farmers never employ gangs." "It is not on poor land, but on land which affords rent of from 40 to 50 shillings, that women and children are employed in the greatest numbers." (1. .... . Hence, in the velocity of the currency we have the fluent unity of the anti- thetical and complementary phases, the unity of the conversion of the useful aspect of commodities into their value-aspect, and their re-conversion from the latter aspect to the former, or the unity of the two processes of sale and purchase. MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 481 an opposition that throws a fresh and glaring light on the Free- trade dogma, according to which, in a society with conflicting interests, each individual necessarily furthers the common weal by seeking nothing but his own personal advantage! One example is enough. Before we inquire how human material is incorporated with this objective organism, let us consider some general effects of this revolution on the labourer himself. Every day brings a man 24 hours nearer to his grave: but how many days he has still to travel on that road, no man can tell accurately by merely looking at him. Here, the whole process, which, when carried on as Manufacture, was split up into, and carried out by, a series of operations, is completed by a single machine, working a combination of va- rious tools. He has 1 "A day's labour is vague, it may be long or short." ("An Essay on Trade and Commerce, Containing Observations on Taxes, &c." London, 1770. The public debt becomes one of the most powerful levers of primitive accumulation. So far, we are still in the domain of simple co-operalion, which finds its materials ready to hand in the shape of men and things. However great the fall in its value, 12 ounces of gold still have 12 times the value of 1 ounce; and in prices, the only thing consid- ered is the relation between different quantities of gold. 1 As has been already said, the simple translation of the value, or respec- tively of the price, of labour-power into the exoteric form of wages transforms all these laws into laws of the fluctuations of wages. 83, n. Quite the contrary: whenever, by an exchange, we equate as values our different products, by that very act, we also equate, as human labour, the different kinds of labour expended upon them. The process then differentiates them into commodi- ties and money, and thus produces an external opposition corre- sponding to the internal opposition inherent in them, as being at once use-values and values. In the third book we shall return again to the fanatical opposition of the mas- ters to those clauses which imposed upon them a slight expendi- ture on appliances for protecting the limbs of their workpeople, 1 The evidence of some Bradford export-houses is as follows: "Under these circumstances, it seems clear that no boys need be worked longer than from 8 a. Each individual man's day is an aliquot part of the collective working-day, no matter whether the 12 men assist one another in their work, or whether the connex- ion between their operations consists merely in the fact, that the men are all working for the same capitalist. Wayland: "The Elements of Political Economy." Boston, 1843, p. The average age at which the children commence work is six years, but in many cases it is below five. H. THE RATE OP SURPLUS-VALUE 215 At first sight it appears a strange proceeding, to equate the constant capital to zero. 27,533,968 yds. The relations between them cease on the day when the term stipulated in the contract they concluded ex- pires. I., p. £54 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION London during the last ten years proves beyond doubt the grow- ing horror in which the working-people hold the slavery of the workhouse, that place of punishment for misery. Hence, on the introduction of the Factory Act into a given in- dustry, a period varying from six to eighteen months is fixed within which it is incumbent on the manufacturers to remove all technical impediments to the working of the Act. "Ch. Emp. This refers to the cotton trade as a whole, and, of course, requires considerable modification for individual districts. North, 1. the labouring class compose the bulk of the people." 1 Nay, the impulse to self- expropriation, on the part of labouring humanity, for the glory of capital, exists so little, that slavery, according to Wakefield himself, is the sole natural basis of Colonial wealth. It has even considerably reduced the temperature of the stoves themselves with a considerable saving of fuel, and with a readier effect on the ware." 1 In spite of every prophecy, the cost-price of earthenware did not rise, but the quantity produced did, and to such an extent that the export for the twelve months, ending December, 1865, exceeded in value by £ 138,628 the average of the preceding three years. Apart from their wording, which makes it easy for the cap- italist to evade them, the sanitary clauses are extremely mea- gre, and, in fact, limited to provisions for whitewashing the walls, for insuring cleanliness in some other matters, for ventilation, and for protection against dangerous machinery. of yarn, represent nothing but the new value of 6s., created during the 12 hours' spinning process. The second term of its first metamorphosis, C — M, the money-form, then becomes the first term of its final metamorphosis, M — C, its re-conversion into the Bible. That is why we decide that 8 hours are enough for a working-day, and ought to be legally recognised as enough; why we call to our help that powerful lever, the press; ... 27-32. The currency 2 of money The change of form, C — M — G, by which the circulation of the material products of labour is brought about, requires that a given value in the shape of a commodity shall begin the process, and shall, also in the shape of a commodity, end it. 4 1 "L'argent se partage entre les nations relativement au besoin qu'elles en ont ... 'One of the finest sheep farms in Sutherlandshire, for which EXPROPRIATION OF AGRICULTURAL POPULATION 733 less terrorism, were just so many idyllic methods of primitive accumulation. . off the re- maining 9s. 318). His system- atic colonisation is a mere pis aller, since he unfortunately has to do with free men, not with slaves. The suppression of the monasteries, &c, hurled their inmates into the proletariat. He was prosecuted for breach of contract, and condemned to two months' imprisonment. The automaton, as capital, and because it is capital, is endowed, in the person of the capitalist, with intelligence and will; it is therefore animat- ed by the longing to reduce to a minimum the resistance offered by that repellent yet elastic natural barrier, man. the low language, which they are accustomed to hear from their tenderest years, the filthy, indecent, and shameless habits, amidst which, unknowing, and half wild, they grow up, make them in after-life lawless, abandoned, dissolute. . The production of wearing apparel is carried on partly in manufactories in whose workrooms there is but a reproduction of that division of labour, the membra disjecta of which were found ready to hand; partly by small master-handicraftsmen; MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 471 these, however, do not, as formerly, work for individual con- sumers, but for manufactories and warehouses, and to such an extent that often whole towns and stretches of country carry on certain branches, such as shoemaking, as a speciality; finally, on a very great scale by the so-called domestic workers, who form an external department of the manufac- tories, warehouses, and even of the workshops of the smaller masters. Such a general and nominal rise of prices has the same effect as if the values had been expressed in weight of silver instead of in weight of gold. In some States, particularly in Mexico (before the American Civil War, also in the territories taken from Mexico, and also, as a matter of fact, in the Danubian provinces till the revolution effected by Kusa), slavery is hidden under the form of peonage. m. The time necessary for the completion of the whole work is thereby shortened. The buyer gives a certain sum of money, the seller an article of a nature different from money. I have shown by the example of Ricardo in what way their false conception of the laws that regulate the quantity of the circulating medium, 144 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION chiefly and necessarily in those periods when the customary equi- librium in the interchange of products between different nations is suddenly disturbed. This direct antagonism between the two comes out most strongly, whenever newly introduced machinery competes with handi- crafts or manufactures, handed down from former times. On a very large scale it prevails in practice — prevails .... . Instead of each man being allowed to perform all the various operations in suc- cession, these operations are changed into disconnected, isolated ones, carried on side by side; each is assigned to a different arti- ficer, and the whole of them together are performed simultaneous- ly by the co-operating workmen. There is a time when the mas- ter's right in his workman's labour ceases, and his time becomes his own, even if there were no exhaustion in the question." (Reports, &c., for 31st Oct., 1862, p. Im- proved construction of the machinery isnecessary, partly because without it greater pressure cannot be put on the workman, and partly because the shortened hours of labour force the capitalist to exercise the strictest watch over the cost of production. 461,554 . per piece, and thus earns in 12 hours 3 shillings. is used to flavour a largo quantity of broth or gruel, of meal and leeks, and day after day this is the labourer's dinner." The advance of industry resulted for him, in this harsh and damp climate, in "the abandonment of the solid homespun clothing in favour of the cheap and so-called cotton goods," and of stronger drinks for so-called tea. Thus it becomes — money. I have to bawl at them to keep them awake." W. We shall, however, see, in Book III., that even in the case of average prices the assumption cannot he made in this very simple manner. See Roscher's "Die Grundlagen der Natio- nalokonomie, Dritte Auflage," 1858. That we saw from the analysis of a commodity. (7) Farms over 100 acres. 444 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION in the United States, and with it the African slave trade, but also made the breeding of slaves the chief business of the border slave- states. As with other commodi- ties, this value was determined by the cost of production. But another portion is consumed by the members as means of subsistence. . l These anti- thetic and complementary phases, of which the process of meta- 1 "Ce sont ies productions qui le (l'argent) mettent en mouvement et le font circuler ... But it can also be accompanied by very barbarian notions, more especially in the heads of those who are as much interested, prac- tically, in the process of making value beget value, as they are in misunderstanding that process theoretically. He revolts against this particular form of the means of production, as being the material basis of the capitalist mode of production. x Further, every branch of industry attracts each year a new 1 A disciple of Ricardo, in answer to the insipidities of J. No; 6 miles away, so that he walks daily, to and fro, 12 miles. This equivalent has no relative form of value in com- mon with other commodities, but its value is relatively expressed by a never ending series of other commodities. Mr. Rogers belongs to the Liberal School, is a personal friend of Cobden and Bright, and therefore no laudator temporis acti. 108 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION also frees the social process of production and the relations of the individual producers to each other within that process, from all dependence on the will of those producers, and that the seeming mutual independence of the individuals is supplemented by a system of general and mutual dependence through or by means of the products. (F. COMMODITIES 39 Some people might think that if the value of a commodity is determined by the quantity of labour spent on it, the more idle and unskilful the labourer, the more valuable would his commodity be, because more time would be required in its pro- duction. c, pp. Although manufacture creates, as we have already seen, a simple separation of the labourers into skilled and unskilled, simultaneously with their hierarchic arrangement in classes, yet the number of the unskilled labourers, owing to the preponderating influence of the skilled, remains very limited. Unfor- tunately, due to insufficient inspection personnel, the English code is still largely a dead letter with regard to its application to workshops. The quantity of it consumed in a giv- en time, by a given amount of labour, increases in the same ratio as does the productive power of that labour in consequence of its division. 8 "Profit, in the usual condition of the market, is not made by ex- changing. It converts what was formerly variable capital, invested in labour-power, into machinery which, being constant capital, does not produce surplus-value. It is . 3 I.e., pp. Nor is this nearly all the toil which the distance occa- sions him. that not many years ago, an agreement had been made between a London parish and a Lancashire manufacturer, by which it was stipulated, that with every 20 sound children one idiot should be taken." 760 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION of the wage-workers in Europe needed, for its pedestal, slavery pure and simple in the new world. This process is accompanied by the continued increase in the quantity of the precious metals, an increase caused by their streaming in to replace the articles directly bartered for them at their sources of production. Bankes and of the Earl of Shaftesbury. You see then, your assertion, that the workman produces, in the last hour but one, the value of his wages, and in the last hour your net profit, amounts to no more than this, that in the yarn produced by him in 2 working-hours, whether they are the 2 first or the 2 last hours of the working-day, in that yarn, there are incorporated 11 y working-hours, or just a whole day's work, i.e., two hours of his own work and 9y hours - 3 of other people's. which performs the most wearisome, the vilest, the most disgusting functions, which takes, in a word, on its shoulders all that is disagreeable and servile in life, and pro- cures thus for other classes leisure, serenity of mind and conven- tional [c'est bon!] dignity of character." 2 Storch asks himself in what then really consist the progress of this capitalistic civili- sation with its misery and its degradation of the masses, as com- pared with barbarism. The general character of the labour-process is evidently not changed by the fact, that the labourer works for the capitalist instead of for him- self; moreover, the particular methods and operations employed in bootmaking or spinning are not immediately changed by the intervention of the capitalist. Turks, soldiers, and tyrants are also bad men, yet must they let the people live, and confess that they are bad, and enemies, and do, nay, must, now and then show pity to some. "Another cause of idleness in this king- dom is the want of a sufficient number of labouring hands.... We may see a bit of flesh meat sometimes, but very seldom. Its movement therefore represents nothing but the continued alternation of the inverse phases of the metamorphosis G— M— C, phases in which commodi- ties confront their value-forms, only to disappear again immedi- ately. 270 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION stock-jobbing swindle every one knows that some time or other the crash must come, but every one hopes that it may fall on the head of his neighbour, after he himself has caught the shower of gold and placed it in safety. He informed Mr. White, one of the Inquiry Commis- sioners: "As far as I can see, the greater amount of education which a part of the working-class has enjoyed for some years past is an evil. It is developed in manufacture which cuts down the labourer into a detail labourer. Alongside of the hie- rarchic gradation there steps the simple separation of the labour- ers into skilled and unskilled. Corn, for example, is a raw material for millers, starch-manu- facturers, distillers, and cattle-breeders. * The shortening of the hours of labour creates, to begin with, the subjective conditions for the condensation of labour, by enabling the workman to exert more strength in a given time. . Only under certain circumstances does it become capital. As far as the actual agricultural labourers of both sexes and of all ages are concerned, their number fell from 1,241,396, in 1851, to 1,163,217 in 1861. 414 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION following contemporary statement by Leonard Horner, the fac- tory inspector, their ever watchful censor. Since, however, it is impossible, by circulation alone, to account for the conversion of money into capital, for the formation of sur- plus-value, it would appear, that merchants' capital is an impos- sibility, so long as equivalents are exchanged; 1 that, therefore, it can only have its origin in the two-fold advantage gained, over both the selling and the buying producers, by the merchant who parasitically shoves himself in between them. Will. 43,366 2,434 3 1 "Public Health, Sixth Report," 1864, pp. 1 "Le prix d'une marchandise ne pouvant etre paye que par le prix d'une autre marchandise." (Mercier de la Riviere: "L'Ordre naturel et esseu- tiel de societes politiques." Physiocrates, ed Daire II. We shall, therefore, in the third book, treat of this ratio ex- haustively. The circuit G— M— G starts with one commodity, and fin- ishes with another, which falls out of circulation and into consump- tion. Answer: Yes, and in fact the competition between the hand-loom and the power-loom is main- tained out of the poor-rates.' Thus degrading pauperism or expatriation, is the benefit which the industrious receive from the introduction of machinery, to be reduced from the respectable and in some degree independent mechanic, to the cringing wretch who lives on the debasing bread of charity. 1,299,893, but in 1858, 1,409,883. 158, 159. 693, p. Gold and silver possess these properties by Nature. It is quite clear that a boy who has been at school all the morning, cannot (in hot weather particularly) cope with one who comes fresh and bright from his work." 2 Further information on this point will be found in Senior's speech at the Social Science Congress at Edinburgh in 1863. But with the additional capital thus exported, a part of the "labour-fund" invented by God and Bentham is also exported. . . 48, 61.) In his "Three Lectures on the Rale of Wages," London, 1830, in which N. 3 How was it possible to control a system which, "under the guise of relays, is some one of the many plans for shuffling 'the hands' about in endless variety, and shifting the hours of work and of rest for different individuals through- out the day, so that you may never have one complete set of hands working together in the same room at the same time." 4 But altogether independently of actual over-work, this so- called relay system was an offspring of capitalistic fantasy such as Fourier, in his humorous sketches of "Courtes Seances," has never surpassed, except that the "attraction of labour" was changed into the attraction of capital. . But the value of a commodity repre- sents human labour in the abstract, the expenditure of human la- bour in general. Machinery has executed, no doubt, the work that would demand the sinews of millions of men; but it has also prodigiously multiplied the labour of those who are governed by its fearful movements. Therefore is there, on this earth, no greater enemy of man (aher the devil) than a gripe- money, and usurer, for he wants to be God over all men. The uncertainty and instability to which machinery subjects the em- ployment, and consequently the conditions of existence, of the operatives become normal, owing to these periodic changes of the industrial cycle. "It is impossible for a child to pass through the purgatory of a tile-field without great moral degradation. When in 1735, John Wyatt brought out his spinning machine, and began the industrial revolution of the 18th century, not a word did he say about an ass driving it instead of a man, and yet this part fell to the ass. . The Poor Law and its administration were in 1795 and 1814 the same. Gold is in form D, what linen was in form C — the universal equiva- lent. — This has now been done away with. . He tries persuasion. 2 If, on the one hand, the concentration of many machines in large manufactories leads to the use of steam power, on the other hand, the competition of steam with human muscles hastens on the concentration of work- people and machines in large factories. There is even no expedient for rolling up the warp; the loom must therefore be kept stretched to its full length, and becomes so inconveniently large, that it cannot be contained within the hut of the manufacturer, who is therefore compelled to ply his trade in the open air, where it is interrupted by every vicissitude of the weather." 2 It is only the special skill accumulated from generation to generation, and transmitted from father to son, that gives to the Hindu, as it does to the spider, this proficiency. One form would appear peculiar to them, and is known as potter's asthma, or potter's consumption. Labour-power itself is energy transferred to a human organism by means of nourishing matter. It is the same as if he worked 3 days in the week for him- self, and 3 days in the week gratis for the capitalist. ... But now the 36 lbs. I. Third, the demoralised and ragged, and those unable to work, chiefly people who succumb to their incapacity for adaptation, due to the division of labour; people who have passed the normal age of the labourer; the victims of industry, whose num- ber increases with the increase of dangerous machinery, of mines, chemical works, &c, the mutilated, the sickly, the widows, &c. 15.) "Le simple ouvrier, qui n'a que ses bras et son industrie, n'a rien qu'autant qu'il parvient a vendre a d'autres sa peine... . of linen = 20 yds. II, pp. Smith: "Wealth of Nations," bk. Or a larger period of oscillations in the market-price is taken, e.g., a year, and they are found to cancel one the other, leaving a mean average quantity, a relatively con- stant magnitude. 1 It therefore also, for the first time, conquers for industrial capital the entire home-market. An in- creased quantity of the article has perhaps to be delivered within a given time. Say; what is "valeur"? 2 It may be but a ruinous one-bedroomed hut, hav- 1 "The labourers' houses (in the open villages, which, of course, are always over-crowded) are usually in rows, built with their backs against the extreme edge of the plot of land which the builder could call his, and on this account are not allowed light and air, except from the front." (Dr. Hunter's Report, 1. To get that far, another twenty years of experimentum in corpore vili had been required. The subor- dination of labour to capital was only formal — i.e., the mode 738 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION of production itself had as yet no specific capitalistic character. If, under these circumstances, in consequence, for instance, of a poor crop of wool, the labour-time necessary 1 Value is here, as occasionally in the preceding pages, used in sense of value determined as to quantity, or of magnitude of value. Different communities find different means of production, and different means of subsistence in their natural en- vironment. Here capital can grow into powerful masses in a single hand because there it has been withdrawn from many individual hands. While the value of the labour- power falls from 4 shillings to 3, i.e., by -7- or 25%, the surplus-value rises from 2 shillings to 3, i.e., by y or 50%. For example, if the necessary la- bour==5 hours and the surplus-labour=5 hours, the degree of exploitation is 100%. . 370. THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 677 The repeal of the Corn Laws gave a marvellous impulse to English agriculture. CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO CAPITAL 599 SECTION 4.— CIRCUMSTANCES THAT, INDEPENDENTLY OF THE PROPORTIONAL DIVISION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO CAPITAL AND REVENUE, DETERMINE THE AMOUNT OF ACCUMULATION. The rent of H.'s house, Is. a week; one bedroom for man, wife, and 6 children. 15. 440 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION and they, as regards these commodities, were not wage-labourers, but buyers. This is the first step to which com- petition leads. This change takes place spon- taneously. 35. The experience of the three following years showed that such an attempt must come to grief against the resistance of the adult it. We leave on one side here the purely economic causes of the agricultural revolution. The wear and tear we put at 10%, or £1,000 yeary= £20 weekly. 23. Jones: "An Essay on the Distribution of Wealth," part I. . of yarn, whose value is equal to the surplus-value, created by his surplus-labour during half a day. . He "ran moulds" (carried ready-moulded ar- ticles into the drying-room, afterwards bringing back the empty mould) from the beginning. But we follow him into the city or town, and we see the stress of work on that strong man, and what then is his position in the death- rate of his country. His own yarns circulate, only because he brings his annual product to market, as all other capitalists likewise do with their commodities. In the preceding investigation we have treated the total product as the final result, ready for use, of a working-day of 12 hours. Any two of the factors may vary and the third remain constant, or all three may vary at once. The expropriators are expropriated. They are dying of hunger. 1 cruelty reigns here in England among the men of trade, that is not to be met with in any other society of men, nor in any other kingdom of the world." ("An Essay on Credit and the Bankrupt Act," Lond., 1707, p. w f . At the end of 1871, Mr. A. 3 "The illegal alienation of the Crown Estates, partly by sale and part- ly by gift, is a scandalous chapter in English history... LaBt uns leben das Leben der Vater, und lafit uns der Gaben Arbeitslos uns freun, welche die Gottin uns schenkt.'" (Gedichte aus dem Griechischen iibersetzt von Christian Graf zo Stolberg, Hamburg, 1782.) MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 409 crude and half-educated parvenus, might become "eminent spin- ners," "extensive sausage-makers," and "influential shoe-black dealers," to do this, they lacked the bump of Christianity. Polit. It is clear that this direct dependence of the operations, and there- fore of the labourers, on each other, compels each one of them to spend on his work no more than the necessary time, and thus a continuity, uniformity, regularity, order, 1 and even intensity of labour, of quite a different kind, is begotten than is to be found in an independent handicraft or even in simple co-operation. c, p. Since every article produced by a machine is cheaper than a similar article produced by hand, we deduce the following infallible law: If the total quantity of the article produced by machinery, be equal to the to- tal quantity of the article previously produced by a handicraft or by manufacture, and now made by machinery, then the total labour expended is diminished. If you compare it with the num- bers fed upon the farm, you will find that an estate in the Highlands main- tains, perhaps, ten times as many people as another of the same value in a good and fertile province." (1. c. 244.) CONTRADICTIONS IN THE FORMULA OF CAPITAL 159 ities may be sold at prices deviating from their values, but these deviations are to be considered as infractions of the laws of the exchange of commodities, J which in its normal state is an exchange of equivalents, consequently, no method for increasing value. It is thus strikingly clear, that means of production never transfer more value to the product than they themselves lose during the labour-process by the destruction of their own use- value. 1,091,373,930 lbs. In 1854 the length of the railroads worked in the United King- dom was 8,054 miles, with a paid-up capital of £286,068,794; in 1864 the length was 12,789 miles, with capital paid up of £425,719,613. (S. It is only the value of the linen that is expressed. Because the Factory Acts made two sets of children necessary, one working six hours, the other four, or each working five hours. the parents of children would seek employment for their children in other directions, for instance, in manufacture?" "Not generally I think" (n. 3 "It is self-evident, that, amid the ebbings and flowings of the markets and the alternate expansions and contractions of demand, occasions will constantly recur, in which the manufacturer may employ additional floating capital without employing additional fixed capital ... Another, and a still more powerful instrument is emigration. 43, 44.) 2 That the price of each single kind of commodity forms a part of the sum of the prices of all the commodities in circulation, is a self-evident proposition. "Report by Dr. Henry Julian Hunter on the excessivt mortality of infants in some rural districts of England." 6 1. With few exceptions, e.g., when public gas-works are involved, the worker in England is now put on an equal footing with the employer in case of breach of contract and can be sued only civilly.— F.E.] The second case occurs in Wiltshire at the end of November 1863. is a pledge." (John Bellers: "Essays about the Poor, Manu- factures, Trade, Plantations, and Immorality," Lond., 1699, p. Consequently, he takes less time in doing it, than the artificer who performs a whole series of operations in succession. Before I came here I was nearly a year at the same work at some works in the country. 161). But the former sphere alone in- terests us at present. The wage-labourers of agriculture consisted partly of peasants, who utilised their leisure time by working on the large estates, partly of an independent special class of wage-labourers, relatively and absolutely few in numbers. 2 Is any capital set free by this metamorphosis? (See "An Inquiry into those Principles Respecting the Nature of Demand and the Necessity of Consumption, lately advocated by Mr. Malthus," &c Lond., 1821, p. Thus the Physiocrats insist that only agricultural labour is productive, since that alone, they say, yields a surplus-value. 2 "Under this simple form ... Hence, in spite of the confusing variety of the commodities them- selves, their values become magnitudes of the same denomination, gold-magnitudes. This is their plain, homely, bodily form. "A deadly lassitude, a hopeless surrendering up to filth," reigns in Gamblingay. Coroner's inquests.— "With regard to coroner's inquests in your district, have the workmen confidence in the pro- ceedings at those inquests when accidents occur?" "No; they have not." (n. 2 In those agricultural districts, "where a minimum in the employment of women exists, the death-rate is on the other hand very low. The reproduction of the working-class carries with it the ac- cumulation of skill, that is handed down from one generation to another. But who, in 1860, the Zenith year of the Eng- lish cotton industry, would have dreamt of the galloping im- provements in machinery, and the corresponding displacement of working people, called into being during the following 3 years, under the stimulus of the American Civil War? 378, 379, 380.) V. For an adulteress and adul- terer do one another great service and pleasure. 1 It is owing to the absence of this kind of co-operation that, in the western part of the United States, quantities of corn, and in those parts of East India where English rule has destroyed the old com- munities, quantities of cotton, are yearly wasted. 3 So also is the establishment of socially-recognised 1 Karl Marx, "Zur Kritik der Politischen Oekonomie." Berlin, 1859, p. 212, 213, 328. But industrial capital too is money, that is changed into commodi- ties, and by the sale of these commodities, is re-converted into more money. . In proportion as capitalist production is developed in a coun- try, in the same proportion do the national intensity and productivi- ty of labour there rise above the international level. The more nearly the time approached for the coming into full force of the Factory Act, the fatal year 1836, the more wildly raged the mob of manufacturers. At a given stage in its development, the narrow technical basis on which manufacture rested, came into conflict with requirements of production that were created by manufacture itself. . 3 5 8 No. 7. By making the coat the equivalent of the linen, we equate the labour embodied in the former to that in the latter. With their usual practical acute- ness, they had found out that the learned Professor "wanted a good deal of finishing;" it was this discovery that caused them to write for him. 7(56 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION of the two modes of production. It may be made either longer or shorter. In con- trast with the manufacturing period, the division of labour is thenceforth based, wherever possible, on the employment of women, of children of all ages, and of unskilled labourers, in one word, on cheap labour, as it is characteristically called in England. s , surplus-labour v u necessary labour Both ratios, - and Dece * sary lab(mr , express the same thing in different ways; in the one case by reference to materialised, incor- porated labour, in the other by reference to living, fluent labour. THE MODERN THEORY OF COLONISATION 769 and their employers who combine capital and labour in particular works. 3 "Land, to be an element of colonisation, must not only be waste, but it mu=l be public property, liable to be converted into private property." (1 c Vol II., p 125 ) 4 L. . (David Bucha- nan: "Observations on, &.C., A. The independent existence of the exchange-value of a com- modity is here a transient apparition, by means of which the com- modity is immediately replaced by another commodity. The different momenta of primitive accumulation distribute themselves now, more or less in chronological order, particularly over Spain, Portugal, Holland, France, and England. Od. per diem; while the wages of the weavers on the average of a year, never exceeded 10s. 1 The property of the capitalist in the product of the labour of others "is a strict consequence of the law of appropriation, the fundamental prin- ciple of which was, on the contrary, the exclusive title of every labourer to the product of his own labour." (Cherbuliez, "Richesse ou Pauvrete," Paris, 1841, p 58, where, however, the dialectical reversal is not properly developed.) * The following passage (to p. 3 1 It appears paradoxical to assert, that uncaught fish, for instance, are a means of production in the fishing industry. They develop at a much quicker rate, because mere accumulation, the absolute increase of the total social capital, is accompanied by the centralisation of the individual capitals of which that total is made up; and be- cause the change in the technological composition of the additional capital goes hand in hand with a similar change in the technologi- cal composition of the original capital. then formed a much more impor- tant part of the nation than at present. (Holinshed, "Description of Eng- land," Vol 1. * Of course this does not alter the general relations between capital and wage-labour. Mathematicians and mechanicians, and in this they are fol- lowed by a few English economists, call a tool a simple machine, and a machine a complex tool. But even apart from these relative differences of the value of money in different countries, it will be found, frequently, that the daily or weekly, &c, wage in the first nation is higher than in the second, whilst the relative price of labour, i.e., the price of labour as compared both with surplus-value and with the value of the product, stands higher in the second than in the first. hindered him from being a Christian.. , . Given the individual, the production of labour-power consists in his reproduction of himself or his maintenance. Simonde (i. The Times reminded him of the manufacturers' revolt against the Ten Hours' Bill. Comm. The Factory Act (1864) made the saving of time a necessity, and so forced into existence a dipping machine, the vapour from which could not come in contact with the workers. Done, toute la societe actuelle, fondee sur le travail-marchandise, est desormais fondee sur une license poetique, sur une expression figuree. All that forest land is as totally unproduc- tive.... Our cotton mills may be brought to a stand by the periodical stagnations of trade, which, under pres- ent arrangements, are as inevitable as death itself; but the human mind is con- stantly at work, and although we believe we are under the mark in stating that six millions of persons have left these shores during the last 25 years, yet, from the natural increase of population, and the displacement of labour to cheapen production, a large percentage of the male adults in the mostpros- perous times find it impossible to obtain work in factories on any condi- tions whatever." ("Reports of Insp. Note in the 3rd German edition: To-day, thanks to the competition on the world-market, established since then, we have advanced much further. .by adopting expedients, the secret of which only the labourer knows; by reducing his daily rations; by substituting rye-bread for wheat; by eating less meat, or even none at all, and the same with butter and condiments; by content- ing themselves with one or two rooms where the family is crammed together, where boys and girls sleep side by side, often on the same pallet; by economy of clothing, washing, decency; by giving up the Sunday diversions; by, in short, resigning them- selves to the most painful privations. The number of workmen in itself does not affect, either the rate of surplus-value, or the degree of exploitation of labour-power. 47. If we now consider the case of any instrument of labour during the whole period of its service, from the day of its entry into the workshop, till the day of its banishment into the lumber room, we find that during this period its use-value has been completely consumed, and therefore its exchange-value completely transferred to the product. On the introduction of machinery the com- position of this capital becomes altered. Another important factor in the accumulation of capital is the degree of productivity of social labour. He has, therefore, produced not only surplus-value, which we for the present regard as a fund to meet the private consumption of the capitalist, but he has also produced, before it flows back to him in the shape of wages, the fund out of which he himself is paid, the variable capital; and his employment lasts only so long as he con- tinues to reproduce this fund. Capital now sets the la- bourer to work, not with a manual tool, but with a machine which itself handles the tools. This alternation may be effected in various ways; e.g., it may be so arranged that part of the work- ers are one week employed on day-work, the next week on night- work. a man could not earn more than 8s. 3 In the 18th century the hunted-out Gaels were for- bidden to emigrate from the country, with a view to driving them by force to Glasgow and other manufacturing towns. The doorway and window were rhomboi- dal." Of 17 houses visited, only 4 had more than one bedroom, and those four over-crowded. I have done so seven or eight weeks." Fifteen hours of labour for a child 7 years old! J. Th. Thornton. One portion he lays out in buy- ing weavers, the other in woollen yarn, machinery, &c. Inspection of mines.— Casualties from explosions are not the only things the workmen suffer from. . 174 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION One consequence of the peculiar nature of labour-power as a commodity is, that its use-value does not, on the conclusion of the contract between the buyer and seller, immediately pass into the hands of the former. Lond. c, p. 1 SECTION 2.— RELATIVE DIMINUTION OF THE VARIABLE PART OF CAPITAL SIMULTANEOUSLY WITH THE PROGRESS OF ACCUMULATION AND OF THE CONCENTRATION THAT ACCOMPANIES IT According to the economists themselves, it is neither the actual extent of social wealth, nor the magnitude of the capital already functioning, that lead to a rise of wages, but only the constant growth of accumulation and the degree of rapidity of that growth. But Hercules shall hear the cry of the oxen and of his pris- oners, and shall seek Cacus even in cliffs and among rocks, and shall set the oxen loose again from the villain. It is concentration of capitals already formed, destruction of their individual independence, expropriation of capitalist by capital- ist, transformation of many small into few large capitals. And to the injustice arising from the unfair conditions of competition, in regard to hours, that would be created if the smaller places of work were exempt, would be added the disadvantage to the larger manufacturers, of finding their supply of juvenile and female labour drawn off to the places of work exempt from legislation. 421. It is otherwise during the historic genesis of capitalist production. Since Robinson Crusoe's experiences are a favourite theme with political economists, * let us take a look at him on his island. From this point of view, exchange is for him a social transaction of a general character. The rent of the building we suppose to be £300 a year, or £6 a week. but will be running about." (1. profit v by the transgression of the legal limits of work. 298,847 399,992 379,329 NUMBER OF SPINDLES. ... 1 Let us take a peasant liable to do compulsory service for his lord. The labour of the 12 hours' working-day is represented by the remaining 9— articles. Already in 1840 a Parliamentary Commission of In- quiry on the labour of children had been appointed. 24.) * Malthus, 1. But with the development of exchange it fixes itself firmly and exclusively to particular sorts of commodities, and becomes crystallised by assuming the money- form. He might also have said that the Ameri- can peasant proprietor is but a serf who does enforced labour for himself instead of for his lord. Thus Nature becomes one of the organs of his activity, one that he annexes to his own bodily organs, adding stature to himself in spite of the Bible. Peat for firing costs Is, 6d. they necessarily have a better knowledge of the operations in connexion with the mine." "You do not think there would be a tendency on the part of the workmen to return unfairly severe verdicts?" "No, I think not." (ns. 376. c, p. The extreme forms of the system, its abuse in the "cru- el and incredible" extension of the working-day are naturally passed over in silence. SECTION 9.— THE FACTORY ACTS. 3, pp 166, 165, Edinburgh, 1791-93.) Parson Thomas Chalmers has his suspicions as to Adam Smith having invented the category of "unproductive labourers," solely for the Protestant parsons, in spite of their blessed work in the vineyard of the' Lord. 1850. Comm. In Germany, they tried at first to make one spinner work two spinning-wheels, that is, to work simultaneously with both hands and both feet. II., p. In the district to which I belong there are not a sufficient number of inspectors. A commodity-owner is thus brought into contact with a possessor of money. Commodities, first of all, enter into the process of exchange just as they are. The accidents, both as regards number and kind, are wholly unexampled in the history of machinery. But now comes that revival of trade which the mildly liberal Mr. Forster, the negro's friend, recently crowed over with so much grace. But let us anticipate. The usual mode of procedure is gen- erally the reverse, and in the value-relation nothing is seen but the proportion between definite quantities of two different sorts of commodities that are considered equal to each other. Partie, Paris, 1846, p. . . Labour-power is sold to-day, not with a view of satisfying, by its service or by its product, the personal needs of the buyer. Heat from 80° to 90° for linens, and 100° and up- wards for cambrics. The material variety of these commodities is the ma- terial incentive to the act of exchange, and makes buyers and sellers mutually dependent, because none of them possesses the object of his own wants, and each holds in his hand the object of another's wants. In Moldavia conditions are still harder. London, 1832. he will be able to clothe his workmen by means of a smaller proportion of the entire return ... an hour. Hence the use that can be made of the total annual product, depends entirely upon its own composition, but in no way upon circulation. xxi, xxii. 732,017 . rations d'hommes [how generous of Mr. Molinari!]: mais ne vaudrait-il pas mieux que ni les uns ni les autres perissent?" (Molinari, 1. The manufac- turers attended at these offices, and selected such persons as they chose; when they had selected such persons as their 'wants required,' they gave instructions to have them forwarded to Man- chester, and they were sent, ticketed like bales of goods, by ca- nals, or with carriers, others tramping on the road, and many of them were found on the way lost and half-starved. Instead of the statistics of orphan asylums, &c, the declamations of the min- isterial journals in recommending dowries for the Royal children might also serve. Among the instruments of labour, those of a mechanical nature, which, taken as a whole, we may call the bone and mus- cles of production, offer much more decided characteristics of a given epoch of production, than those which, like pipes, tubs, baskets, jars, &c, serve only to hold the materials for labour, which latter class, we may in a general way, call the vascular system of production. 2.) According to this same Strype, in Somersetshire, in one year, 40 per- sons were executed, 35 robbers burnt in the hand, 37 whipped, and 183 dis- charged as "incorrigible vagabonds." Nevertheless, he is pf opinion that this lara:e number of prisoners does not comprise even a fifth of the actual crimi- nals, thanks tc the negligence of the justices and the foolish compassion of the people; and the other counties of England were not better oft in this respect than Somersetshire, while some were even worse. The factory in England is still a "mill." In German technological works of the first decade of this century, the term "muhle" is still found in use, not only for all machinery driven by the forces of Nature, but also for all manufactures where apparatus in the nature of machinery is applied. Townsend) 1786," republished Lond. 460 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION co-operation, over 48,000 needles a-day. Hence the perfectly rational revolt in 1860 of the London labourers, employed in the building trades, against the attempt of the capitalists to impose on them this sort of wage by the hour. The different detail processes, which were successive in time, have become simultaneous, go on side by side in space. There middlemen receive the raw material from the capitalist en chef, and group around their sewing-machines, in "chambers" and "garrets," from 10 to 50 or more workwomen. A sugar-loaf being a body, is heavy, and therefore has weight: but we can neither see nor touch this weight. Econ." 2nd ed., Lond.. The extra expenditure of power, demand- ed by every transition from rest to motion, is made up for by pro- longing the duration of the normal velocity when once acquired. MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 379 there was an American machine for making paper cornets. But all was in vain. 123 4 It might be said that not only capital, but also labourers, in the shape of emigrants, are annually exported from England. This term is used in opposition, on the one hand, to the "idle poor," beggars, etc., on the other to those labourers, who, pigeons not yet plucked, are still possessors of their own means of labour. Hence the movement directly imparted to money by the circulation of commodities takes the form of a constant motion away from its starting-point, of a course from the hands of one commodity-owner into those of another. for 12 hours' labour; the price of his labour would be equal to the price of his product. It will be remembered that the rate of surplus-value depends, in the first place, on the degree of exploitation of labour-power. Most of the children go without shoes and unclothed, for the air is so mild. As the use-values, coat 1 Comp. . The British Parliament proclaimed blood-hounds and scalping as "means that God and Nature had given into its hand." The colonial system ripened, like a hot-house, trade and navigation. If the one in- crease its velocity, the other either retards its own, or altogether falls out of circulation; for the circulation can absorb only such a quantity of gold as when multiplied by the mean number of moves made by one single coin or element, is equal to the sum of the prices to be realised. If equivalents are exchanged, no surplus-value results, and if non-equivalents are exchanged, still no surplus- value. In 1834, e.g. But then the manufacturers proposed to the Poor Law Commissioners that they should send the "surplus-population" of the agricultural districts to the north, with the explanation "that the manufac- turers would absorb and use it up." 3 "Agents were appoint- ed with the consent of the Poor Law Commissioners. a gigantic fraud on the nation." (F. of cotton and the fraction of a spindle on the other. 56 ) M. 2 Thomas Stamford Raffles, late Lieut. — I am a beetler and work from 6 in the morning till 11 at night, from Monday to Friday. o oooo ^1 OS © $ o* OS CO 00 CM t^ ^H CO CO ^H CO OS »3« CM a . Income from profits. For Cacus means the villain that is a pious usurer, and steals, robs, eats everything. We have only to read the quotations of a price-list backwards, to find the magnitude of the value of money expressed in all sorts of commodities. The transmitting mechanism, composed of fly-wheels, shafting, toothed wheels, pullies, straps, ropes, bands, pinions, and gearing of the most varied kinds, reg- ulates the motion, changes its form where necessary, as for in- stance, from linear to circular, and divides and distributes it among the working machines. They easily let them for £3 or £4 a-year, and paid a weekly wage of 9s. Ordered by the House of Commons to be printed, 0th August, 1859, pp. 2 Given piece-wage, it is naturally the personal interest of the labourer to strain his labour-power as intensely as possible; this enables the capitalist to raise more easily the normal degree of intensity of labour. MAGNITUDE OF CAPITAL ADVANCED The proportion in which surplus-value breaks up into capi- tal and revenue being given, the magnitude of the capital accumu- lated clearly depends on the absolute magnitude of the surplus- value. 760 " soldier " 1,473 " "405 " prisoner " 1,112 " " 44 "We see that few labouring families can reach, we will not say the average of the sailor or soldier, but even that of the prisoner. 1 )> 7 " 33 Roberts Court . But the exchange of commodities is evidently an act characterised by a total abstraction from use-value. Usury is a great huge monster, like a were-wolf, who lays waste all, more than any Ca- cus, Gerion or Antus. Linguet, "Theorie des Lois Civiles, &c." London, 1767, t. The absolute reduction in the demand for labour which neces- sarily follows from this is obviously so much the greater, the higher the degree in which the capitals undergoing this process of renewal are already massed together by virtue of the central- isation movement. The relative value of commodity A, i.e., its value expressed in com- modity B, rises and falls directly as the value of A, the value of B being supposed constant. 6d., or 3s. 1., 1863, p. From this moment the capital-value and the surplus-value are both of them sums of money , and their reconversion into capital takes place in precisely the same way. But for all that, the use of water, as the predominant motive power, was beset with difficulties. This circumstance influences only the amount of the money that comes back. IV. 408. 10. On the other hand, he can withdraw from circulation no more than what he has thrown into it in the shape of commodities. Polit.," t. We could not well do without lads under 18 working by night. By ruining handicraft production in other coun- tries, machinery forcibly converts them into fields for the supply of its raw material. In so far then as labour is such specific productive activity, in so far as it is spinning, weaving, or forging, it raises, by mere con- tact, the means of production from the dead, makes them living factors of the labour-process, and combines with them to form the new products. This division of a prod- uct into a useful thing and a value becomes practically important, only when exchange has acquired such an extension that useful articles are produced for the purpose of being exchanged, and their character as values has therefore to be taken into account, beforehand, during production. The number of the workwomen employed in these workrooms varies from 20 to 40 in some, and from 10 to 20 in others. 368, 7, 370, 280, 281, 321, 370, 475. Nevertheless, within certain limits, a modification takes place. ' Here we see the modern instincts of feudalism ... Our investigation must therefore begin with the analysis of a com- modity. Only a portion, and perhaps, not a large portion of the wealth which is annually saved in this country, is invested in our own industry." 3 The greater part of the yearly accruing surplus-product, embezzled, because abstracted without return of an equivalent, from the English labourer, is thus used as capital, not in England, but in foreign countries. * In England this system is characteristically called the "Sweating system." On the other hand piece-wage allows the capitalist to make a contract for so much per piece with the head labourer — in manufactures with the chief of some group, in mines with the extractor of the coal, in the fac- tory with the actual machine-worker — at a price for which the head labourer himself undertakes the enlisting and payment of his assist- ant workpeople. . * The one-sidedness and the deficiencies of the detail labourer become perfections when he is a part of the collective labourer. That Mirabeau considers the separate workshops more economical and productive than the "combined," and sees in the latter merely artificial exotics under government cultivation, is explained by the position at that time of a great part of the continental manufactures. The wealth of a na- tion corresponds with its population, and its misery corresponds with its wealth. "The improved method," called forth by the Act, "of making slip by pressure instead of by evaporation, sively into machines wrought by unskilled labour, and every day convinces us that we can produce a greater quantity than by the old method." ("Rep. It differentiates itself as original value from itself as surplus-value; as the father differentiates himself from himself qua the son, yet both are one and of one age: for only by the surplus- value of £10 does the £100 originally advanced become capita i, and so soon as this takes place, so soon as the son, and by the son, the father, is begotten, so soon does their difference vanish, and they again become one, £110. Berlin in 1858 could not provide its contingent of recruits; it was 156 men short." J. of gold; commodity A=an aliquot part of the total commodity =the same aliquot part of x cwt. A Yorkshire mine-owner himself calcu- lates (Times, 26th January, 1867), that putting on one side their office work, which absorbs all their time, each mine can be visited but once in ten years by an inspector. Just as the individual labourer can do more surplus-labour in proportion as his necessary labour-time is less, so with regard to the working population. The one with an air of importance, smirking, intent on business; the other, timid and holding back, like one who is bringing his own hide to market and has nothing to expect but — a hiding. And because it is a necessary condition, and for no other reason, the value of that cotton is transferred to the product. But this, on the one hand, does not prevent 200 ounces of gold from still containing more value than 100 ounces, nor, on the other hand, does it hinder the actual metallic form of this article from continuing to be the universal equiva- lent form of all other commodities, and the immediate social incarnation of all human labour. 47). "In some parts of Scotland this trade [before the introduction of the Factory Act in 1862] was carried on by a system of over-time, i.e., ten hours a day were the regular hours of work, for which a nominal wage of Is. 2d. FORCING DOWN OF WAGES BY ACTS OF PARLIAMENT The proletariat created by the breaking up of the bands of feudal retainers and by the forcible expropriation of the people from the soil, this "free" proletariat could not possibly be absorbed by the nascent manufactures as fast as it was thrown upon the world. Hence it follows that in the labour-process the means of pro- duction transfer their value to the product only so far as along with their use-value they lose also their exchange-value. THE MODERN THEORY OF COLONISATION 767 For the understanding of the following discoveries of Wake- field, two preliminary remarks: We know that the means of pro- duction and subsistence, while they remain the property of the immediate producer, are not capital. 2 But what is it that forms the bond between the at Kendal, blankets at Whitney, and so forth." (Berkeley:"The Quenist," 1751, § 520.) 1 A. The non- agricultural labourers of an Asiatic monarchy have little but then- individual bodily exertions to bring to the task, but their number is their strength, and the power of directing these masses gave rise 334 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION to the palaces and temples, the pyramids, and the armies of gi- gantic statues of which the remains astonish and perplex us. The main point with him is, that the labourer must adapt himself to the work, not the work to the labourer; which latter is unavoidable, it he carries on several trades at once, thus making one or the other of them subor- 366 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION Xenophon, * who with characteristic bourgeois instinct, approaches more nearly to division of labour within the workshop. Nominibus mollire licet mala. To a barbarian owner of commodi- ties, and even to a West-European peasant, value is the same as value-form, and therefore, to him the increase in his hoard of gold and silver is an increase in value. In the one case, the product is entirely made by a single ma- chine, which performs all the various operations previously done by one handicraftsman with his tool; as, for instance, by a weav- er with his loom; or by several handicraftsmen successively, either separately or as members of a system of Manufacture. Every trader knows, that he his right to a certain portion of the common produce destined for consumption. It therefore makes its appearance at an early date in history, though not in the same predominating and characteristic manner as now-a-days. —Since 1842 women are no more employed underground, but are occupied on the surface in loading the coal, &c, in drawing the tubs to the canals and railway waggons, in sorting, &c. The birth of the latter is heralded by a great slaughter of the innocents. . According to the census of 1861, the pop- ulation of England and Wales was 20,066,244; of these, 9,776,259 males, and 10,289,965 females. 1 .... on Saturday night, but more generally up to 4 or 5 o'clock, Sunday morning. Such are the sanitary dangers to which poverty is almost certainly exposed, when it is poverty enough to imply scantiness of food. A characteristic feature is, that, even down into the eighteenth century, the different trades were called "mysteries" (mysteres); 1 into their secrets none but those duly initiated could penetrate. The master shall feed his slave on bread and water, weak broth and such refuse meat as he thinks fit. It is characterised by maximum of working-time, and minimum of wages. lb. The rent of the cottage is a part of the wages. Next, their wages are so low as to threaten industry and wealth equally and perhaps more, but in another way." 2 A tariff of wages was fixed by law for town and country, for piece-work and day- work. Let us now go back to the consideration of the price-form. Further, it will generally be found that the wages of these men bear a certain pro- portion to the price of the necessary means of subsistence, so that a man with two children is able to bring up his family without re- course to parish relief." 1 Malthus at that time remarked with reference to the facts published by Parliament: "I confess that I see, with misgiving, the great extension of the practice of piece- wage. The general value-form is the reduction of all kinds of actual labour to their common character of being human labour generally, of being the expendi- ture of human labour-power. Those that get their living by their daily labour . On the other hand, the average profits were low, and to accumulate, extreme parsi- mony was requisite. 2 But can surplus-value possibly originate anywhere else than in circulation, which is the sum total of all the mutual relations of commodity-owners, as far as they are determined by their commodities? And first, of those that ye thinke should have no losse thereby? Where Surat cotton was used, the loss to the operatives when on full time, amounted to 20, 30, and more per cent. The use-value which the former gets in exchange, manifests itself only in the actual usufruct, in the consumption of the labour- power. On the contrary, it is generally by their imperfections as products, that the means of production in any process assert themselves in their character of products. "The operatives. As the coat and the linen are two qualitatively different use- values, so also are the two forms of labour that produce them, tailoring and weaving. Aft- er Manufacture has once separated, made independent, and isolat- ed the various operations, the labourers are divided, classified, and grouped according to their predominating qualities. And they say so because, with them, surplus-value has no existence except in the form of rent. The hoarder, therefore, makes a sacrifice of the lusts of the flesh to his gold fetish. Value, in this sense, necessarily implies exchanges, riches do not." * "Riches" (use-value) "are the attribute of men, value is the attribute of commodities. At breakfast time, 10 After 2 p. (1 .) Bedfordshire Wrestlingworth. During the other period the period of surplus-labour, the usufruct of the labour-power creates a value for the capitalist, that costs him no equivalent. they would report to the chief inspector, who would then bring his scientific knowledge to bear on the facts they have stated?" (ns. When machinery seizes on an industry by degrees, it produces chronic misery among the operatives who compete with it. . could live in plenty, and accumulate wealth," 1 not to speak of the 15th century, "the golden age of the English labour- er in town and country." We need not, however, go back so far. 4 "Questo infinito che le cose non hanno in progresso, hanno in giro." (Galiani.) 8 "Ce n'est pas la matiere qui fait le capital, mais la valeur de ces ma- lieres." (J. Finally, as is always the case with machinery when not organised into a system, and when it can also be used in dwarfish proportions, handicraftsmen and do- mestic workers, along with their families, or with a little extra labour from without, make use of their own sewing-machines. In its specific capitalist form — and under the given conditions, it could take no other form than a capitalistic one— manufacture is but a particular method of begetting relative surplus-value, or of augmenting at the ex- pense of the labourer the self-expansion of capital— usually called social wealth, "Wealth of Nations," &c. "In 1782," as Frederick Engels teaches us, "all the wool crop in England of the three preceding years, lay untouched for want of labourers, and so it must have lain, if newly invented machinery had not come to its aid and spun it." 1 Labour embodied in the form of machinery of course did not di- rectly force into life a single man, but it made it possible for a smaller number of labourers, with the addition of relatively less living labour, not only to consume the wool productively, and put into it new value, but to preserve in the form of yarn, &c, its old value. Cyclops the forbidding of the night- labour of children and young persons "would be impossible, it would be tantamount to stopping their works," and yet their 1. "If the State were to require that every child should be sent to school, would there be schools for the children to go to?" "No; but I think if the circumstances were to spring up, the schools would be forthcom- ing." (n. are now stated upon the foot of a Price in money." ("An Essay upon Publick Credit." 3rd Ed. Lond., 1710, p. Spinning by machinery, for example, supplied yarn so cheaply and so abundantly that the hand-loom weavers were, at first, able to work full time with- out increased outlay. The latter first begins to play an important part in the chemical industries. If the newly introduced ma- chinery had cost less than did the labour-power and implements displaced by it, if, for instance, instead of costing £1,500, it had cost only £1,000, a variable capital of £1,000 would have been converted into constant capital, and locked up; and a capital of £500 would have been set free. . 8 A steel manufacturer who employs children in night-labour remarked: "It seems but natural that boys who work at night cannot sleep and get proper rest by day. c.) "Une valeur en productions n'a fait que changer de forme." (Id., p. Henry VIII. 3 In undertakings that involve much capital outlay, such as railways, &c, the contractor himself generally provides his army with wooden huts and the like, thus improvising 1 I. By its reference to the coat as its equivalent, as something that can be exchanged for it. c, p. "Le paysan (in Silesia, under Freder- ick II.) est serf." Nevertheless, these serfs possess common lands. CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO CAPITAL 587 However long a series of periodical reproductions and preced- ing accumulations the capital functioning to-day may have passed through, it always preserves its original virginity. . . The linen, by virtue of the form of its value, now stands in a social relation, no longer with only one other kind of commodity, but with the whole world of commodities. During the years 1855, 1856 and 1857, the excess in France of gold-imports over gold-exports amounted to £ 41 ,580,000, while the excess of silver-exports over silver-imports was £ 14,704,000. However use- ful a given kind of raw material, or a machine, or other means of production may be, though it may cost £150, or, say, 500 days' labour, yet it cannot, under any circumstances, add to the value of the product more than £150. Moreover, since, they inherit from their forefathers numerous rules, they are eager to discover fresh advantages." (Diodorus Siculus: Bibl. A commodity represents, say 6 working-hours. One of the most important pro- blems, therefore, which the owner of a factory has to solve, is to find out the maximum speed at which he can run, with a due regard to the above conditions. Time for education, for intel- lectual development, for the fulfilling of social functions and for social intercourse, for the free-play of his bodily and men- tal activity, even the rest time of Sunday (and that in a country of Sabbatarians!) 1 — moonshine! But in its blind un- walks during the performance of his work 15-20 miles in every 6 hours! And the work often lasts 14 or 15 hours! In many of these glass works, as in the Moscow spinning mills, the system of 6 hours' relays is in force. 4 1. The changes in the material mode of production, and the corresponding changes in the social relations of the producers 1 gave rise first to an extravagance beyond all bounds, and then in opposition to this, called forth a control on the part of Society which legally limits, regulates, and makes uniform the working-day and its pauses. xv.) "The devil is a good person. It falls to 3d. Further: the splitting up of the means of production into the individual prop- erty of many independent labourers, working on their own ac- count, he calls equal division of capital. But out of the death of slavery a new life at once arose. If a giant thinker like Aristotle erred in his appreciation of slave labour, why should a dwarf economist like Bastiat he right in his appreciation of wage-labour? 1 1 In Italy, where capitalistic production developed earliest, the disso- lution of serfdom also took place earlier than elsewhere. Over- population supplies these masses. F. 25, n. In this case 20 yards of linen continue equal to 1 coat, however much their values may have altered. 1 "Le travail primitif auquelson capital a du sa naissance." Sismondi, 1. DEGREE OF EXPLOITATION OF LABOUR-POWER. 1.851. The Times of December, 1866, and January, 1867, in like manner published certain outpourings of the heart of the English mine-owner, in which the happy lot of the Belgian miners was pictured, who asked and received no more than was strictly necessary for them to live for their "masters." The Belgian la- bourers have to suffer much, but to figure in The Times as model labourers! In the beginning of February, 1867, came the answer: strike of the Belgian miners at Marchienne, put down by powder and lead. On the one hand, then, it is by virtue of its general character, as being expenditure of human labour-power in the abstract, that spinning adds new value to the values of the cotton and the spin- dle; and on the other hand, it is by virtue of its special character, 1 "Labour gives a new creation for one extinguished." ("An Essay on the Polit. They are displaced twice. c, p. He con- stantly reproduces his own labour-fund, which never, in his case, takes the form of a money payment for his labour, advanced by another person. From 1814 to 1820 these 15,000 inhabitants, about 3,000 families, were systematically hunt- ed and rooted out. Being independent of each other, the labourers are isolated persons, who enter into relations with the capitalist, but not with one another. But not in its natural way. The increase of the population of the country parishes is 6.5 per cent., and of the towns 17.3 per cent. They are but two different modes of ex- pending human labour-power. c.) ■1. 4-5. If a capital of £1,000 beget yearly a surplus-value of £200, and if this surplus-value be consumed every year, it is clear that at the end of 5 years the surplus-value consumed will amount to 5 X £200 or the £1,000 originally advanced. Whereas our youth, here in England, being bred to nothing before they come to be apprentices, make a very slow progress and require much longer time wherein to reach the perfection of accomplished artists." 2 1 W. "This is falsifying a measure, not establishing a standard." He sees in this "false de- nomination" of the weight of gold, as in everything else, the falsifying hand of civilisation. But, at that time, the process was carried on by means of individual acts of violence against which legislation, for a hundred and fifty years, fought in vain. 70-71). Insp. de Lavergne, according to which the English agricultural labourer gets only -7-, the capitalist (farmer) on the other hand — of the product * or of its value, apart from the ques- tion of how the booty is subsequently divided between the capi- talist, the landlord and others. c, pp. With regard to the unusual exertions made by the labouring classes in periods of dearness, which produce the fall of wages noticed in the evidence" (namely, before the Parliamentary Committee of Inquiry, 1814-15), "they are most meritorious in the individ- uals, and certainly favour the growth of capital. I. By maturing the material conditions, and the combination on a social scale of the processes of production, it matures the contradictions and antagonisms of the capitalist form of production, and thereby provides, along with the elements for the formation of a new society, the forces for exploding the old one. till 12 noon next day, for a week together, and sometimes for three shifts together, e.g., from Monday morn- ing till Tuesday night." "Another, now 12, has worked in an iron foundry at Stavely from 6 a. a week, had had Is. taken off for a reduction in the rate of 10 per cent., and Is. 6d. W T ho fails here to call to mind our good friend, Dogberry, who informs neighbour Seacoal, that, "To be a well-favoured man is the gift of fortune; but reading and writing comes by Nature." 3 1 "Observations on certain verbal disputes in Pol. It will be self-un- derstood that every sanitary measure, which, as has been the case hitherto in London, hunts the labourers from one quarter, by demolishing uninhabitable houses, serves only to crowd them together yet more closely in another. A larger portion of the prod- uce of society is changed into surplus-produce, and a larger part of the surplus-produce is supplied for consumption in a multi- plicity of refined shapes. c, p. B's commodity replaces that of A, but A and B do not mutually exchange those commodities. 456 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION among the 2,887 cotton mills in the United Kingdom in 1861, there were many of small size. At present, only one quotation. B. Even the fanatical advocate of the system of large farms, the author of the "Inquiry into the Connexion between the Present Price of Provisions," London, 1773, p, 139, says: "I most lament the loss of our yeomanry, that set of men who really kept up the independence of this nation; and sorry I am to see their lands now in the hands of monopolising lords, tenanted out to small farmers, who hold their leases on such conditions as to be little better than vassals ready to attend a summons on every mischievous occasion." 2 On the private moral character of this bourgeois hero, among other things: "The large grant of lands in Ireland to Lady Orkney, in 1695, is a pub- lic instance of the king's affection, and the lady's influence... c, p. Suppose the same workman were to change his oc- cupation to that of a joiner, he would still by a day's labour add value to the material he works upon. Consequently, although it is strictly forbidden in many, nay in most factories, that machinery should be cleaned while in motion, it is nevertheless the constant practice in most, if not in all, that the workpeople do, unreproved, pick out waste, wipe rollers and wheels, &c, while their frames are in motion. 388 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION field of production is incomparably larger than that of a tool. 1071.) "If the tubs were fraudulently increased, a man could discontinue working by giv- ing 14 days' notice?" "But if he goes to another place, there is the same thing going on there." (n. This subject one must study in detail, to see what the bourgeoisie makes of itself and of the labourer, wherever it can, without restraint, model the world after its own image. 472-475. At all events, they "were pressing on their food-supply." The "clearing of estates," or as it is called in Germany, "Bauern- legen," occurred in Germany especially after the 30 years' war, and led to peasant-revolts as late as 1790 in Kursachsen. 20. This is es- pecially the case where piece-wage predominates, and where loss of time in one part of the day or week can be made good by sub- sequent over-time, or by night-work, a process which brutalises the adult workman, and ruins his wife and children. Nothing can be more childish than the dogma, that because every sale is a purchase, and every purchase a sale, therefore the circulation of commodities necessarily implies an equilibrium of sales and purchases. But besides this, the majority of the manufacturers reduced the rate of piece-wage by5, 7-y, and 10 per cent. c, p. Messrs. 252 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION In the years 1858-60, the journeymen bakers in Ireland organised at their own expense great meetings to agitate against night and Sunday work. Edit., 1815, t. It follows from this, that an increase in the productiveness of labour causes a fall in the value of labour-power and a consequent rise in surplus-value, while, on the other hand, a decrease in such productiveness causes a rise in the value of labour-power, and a fall in surplus-value. 1750, p. What the bourgeoisie, therefore, produces, above all, are its own grave-diggers. It reduces the sound sleep needed for the resto- ration, reparation, refreshment of the bodily powers to just so many hours of torpor as the revival of an organism, absolutely exhausted, renders essential. 2 1. In the midst of our West European society, where the labourer purchases the right to work for his own livelihood only by paying for it in surplus-labour, the idea easily takes root that it is an inherent quality of human labour to furnish a surplus-product. This must, indeed, ultimately be the case if the conditions supposed above continue. But if the public funds are to be devoted to assist 1 "The only thing, of which one can say, that it is stored up and pre- pared beforehand, is the skill of the labourer.... 2 The articles A and B in this case are not as yet commodities, but become so only by the act of barter. Pen- till, in the same parish: a cot let at Is. 3d. Dr. Simon, medical officer to the Privy Council, chose for this work the above-mentioned Dr. Smith. Evi- dence, pp. 11 oz. The new machine hands are exclusively girls and young women. And these children had to do this ceaseless labour of 30 hours in the "shoddy- hole," as the hole is called, in which the woollen rags are pulled in pieces, and where a dense atmosphere of dust, shreds, &c, forces even the adult workman to cover his mouth continually with handkerchiefs for the protec- tion of his lungs! The accused gentlemen affirm in lieu of taking an oath — as quakers they were too scrupulously religious to take an oath— that they had, in their great compassion for the unhappy children, allowed them four hours for sleep, but the obstinate children absolutely would not go to bed. Abundant material relating to these facts, which are concealed by official Political Economy, is to be found in the Reports of the Inspectors of Facto- ries, of the Children's Employment Commission, and more especially in the Reports on Public Health. c, p. Provided its net real income, its rent and profits, be the same, it is of no importance whether the nation consists of 10 or of 12 millions of inhabitants." (Ric. xi.) 478 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION a natural and rude reaction against the tedium of monotonous drudg- ery, it originates, also, to a much greater degree from anarchy in production, anarchy that in its turn pre-supposes unbridled exploi- tation of labour-power by the capitalist. He wishes to receive as much labour as possible for as little money as possible. They may have, after they have done their work, some- times five or six, sometimes only four or five hours' sleep be- fore they begin again. per week when working the ordinary hours ... On the other hand, after 1850, the speed of the spindles and looms was in many cases dou- bled. Therefore, some of the masters use the right which this fatal silence gives them to keep their works going, without inter- mission, day in, day out, possibly with the exception of Sunday. If it employs a smaller number, that of the supernumeraries increases; if it employs a greater, the general demand for labour only increases to the extent of the excess of the employed over those "set free." The impulse that additional capital, seeking an outlet, would otherwise have given to the general demand for labour, is therefore in every case neutralised to the extent of the labourers thrown out of employ- ment by the machine. These children work longer than the labourers in the neighbouring villages.... There are exception- al cases in which the surplus-value produced does not increase in proportion to the number of labourers exploited, but then the value of the labour-power does not remain constant. 3 The problem is in no way simplified by introducing irrele- vant matters after the manner of Col. Next it is to be noted that the laws set forth, in the 17th chapter, on the changes in the relative magnitudes of price of la- bour-power and surplus-value, pass by a simple transformation of form, into laws of wages. At the present time (1871) he has to mind with the help of 5 piecers 2,200 spindles, and produces not less than seven times as much yarn as in 1841." (Alex. 506 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION the naturally grown conditions for the maintenance of that circu- lation of matter, it imperiously calls for its restoration as a system, as a regulating law of social production, and under a form appropriate to the full development of the human race. One might as well conclude that not the value of a machine is paid, but that of its working, because it costs more to hire a machine for a week than for a day. At first the rights of property seemed to us to be based on a man's own labour. 276 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION but four shillings, he would be obliged to work but four days; but as wages in this kingdom are much higher in proportion to the price of necessaries. &c, 30th April, 1864," p. 50.) 488 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION production, variation of work, consequently fitness of the labourer for varied work, consequently the greatest possible development of his varied aptitudes. and inquired what they considered a day's work, and was told 13 hours for a goods man (i.e., 78 hours).... 3 Storch calls true raw materials "matieres," and accessory material "materiaux." Gherbuliez describes accessories as "matieres instrumentales.'* 182 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION Every object possesses various properties, and is thus capable of being applied to different uses. 761,909 . The prolongation of the working-day beyond the point at which the labourer would have produced just an equivalent for the value of his labour-power, and the appropriation of that sur- plus-labour by capital, this is production of absolute surplus-value. Many of them will execute as much work in four days as a Frenchman will in five or six. On the 15th August, 1867, the Factory Acts Extension Act, and on the 21st August, the Workshops' Regulation Act received the Royal Assent; the former Act having reference to large indus- tries, the latter to small. of yarn weekly per spindle. If it be said that 100 millions of people would be required in England to spin with the old spinning-wheel the cotton that is now spun with mules by 500,000 people, this does not mean that the mules took the place of those millions who never existed. In the first place it strikes one as an odd thing for any one to suppose that these well-worn phrases about the middle ages and the an- cient world are unknown to anyone else. To do the work of a steam-engine would require 66 men, at a total cost of 15s. The value and quantity of the in- struments of labour used in common do not, it is true, increase at the same rate as the number of workmen, but they do increase very considerably. The innumerable equations of which the general form of value is composed, equate in turn the labour embodied in the linen to that embodied in every other commodity, and they thus convert weaving into the general form of manifestation of undiffer- entiated human labour. In one of its par- ishes, the Officer of Health reckoned 581 persons per acre, although half the width of the Thames was reckoned in. 12. 1 Under this influence, each parish has a pecu- niary interest in reducing to a minimum the number of its resi- dent labourers: — for, unhappily, agricultural labour instead of implying a safe and permanent independence for the hard- working labourer and his family, implies for the most part only a longer or shorter circuit to eventual pauperism — a pauperism which, during the whole circuit, is so near, that any illness or temporary failure of occupation necessitates immediate recourse to parochial relief — and thus all residence of agricultural pop- ulation in a parish is glaringly an addition to its poor-rates .... An American revolution and a universal crisis, in order that the working girls, who spin for the whole world, might learn to sew! 2 "The numerical increase of labourers has been great, through the growing substitution of female for male, and above all, of childish for adult labour. To this ready-made world of capital, the political economist applies the notions of law and of property inherited from a pre-capitalistic world with all the more anxious zeal and all the greater unction, the more loudly the facts cry out in the face of his ideology. E.\ 628 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION only to change the quantitative groupings of the constituent parts of social capital. They furnish to the capitalist an exact measure for the in- tensity of labour. 239. 7,659,727 . 1 1 1. 2 Gaskell. c, p 25. The same blind eagerness for plun- der that in the one case exhausted the soil, had, in the other, torn up by the roots the living force of the nation. 2 Sismondi; "Nouv. If there be no change in the length of the working- day, the surplus-labour would fall from 6 hours to 4, the surplus- value from 3 shillings to 2. c, pp. The sum of the incomes of the United Kingdom that come under the income tax wasin 1856, £307, 068, 898; in 1859, £328,127,416; in 1862, £351,745,241; in 1863, £359,142,897; in 1864, £362,462,279; in 1865, £385,530,020. Let us now transport ourselves from Robinson's island bathed in light to the European middle ages shrouded in darkness. Thus Russia conquered with one blow the magnates of the Da- nubian provinces, and the applause of liberal cretins throughout Europe. It also acts as a stimulus upon the organs of sight, and by this means brings about more activity in the various cerebral functions." Dr. W. But these farmers had rights of jurisdiction in some degree over the dwellers on the soil; there were four grades. by which a part only of the working-day — i.e., 6 hours' labour — is paid for, appears as the value or price of the whole working-day of 12 hours, which thus includes 6 hours unpaid for. 589.) This same bourgeois is not ashamed to put this question: "Do you not think that the mine-owner also suffers loss from an explosion?" Finally, "Are not you workmen in Lancashire able to take care of your own interests without calling in the Govern- ment to help you?" "No." (n. 52 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION new father of the people, changes its features, hair, and many other things besides. This is effected by hiring steam power, as is done in some of the Birmingham trades, or by the use of small caloric- engines, as in some branches of weaving. The stream of emigration was only diverted from the English colonies to the United States. The working-day that has already been realised in a given value, must necessarily be a day of given length. c, p. About 1750, the yeomanry had disappeared, * and so had, in the last decade of the 18th century, the last trace of the common land of the agricultural labourer. a rent of £1 ,200 a year was recently offered, on the expiry of the existing lease this year, is to be converted into a deer-forest. France, one person to 14 spindles 28 37 46 49 50 50 55 Smaller States of Germany, 55 Great Britain, " " 74 Russia, Prussia, Bavaria, Austria, Belgium. Second, the proportion between wages and surplus-value remains unaltered, since the mass of surplus-labour supplied by each particular labourer corresponds with the wage received by him. ... Suppose the working-day consists of 6 hours of necessary labour, and 6 hours of surplus-labour. But what is the value of a commodity? "Every transaction in which an individual buys produce in order to sell it again, is, in fact, a speculation." (MacCulloch: "A Dictionary Practical, &c, of Commerce." Lond., 1847, p. d. Its functions can be exercised only in an environment that exists in the workshop of the capitalist after the sale. The steam-engine itself, such as it wa« at its invention, during the manufacturing period at the close of the 17th century, and such as it continued to be down to 1780, a did not give rise to any industrial revolution. Otherwise with capital. II., p. 1 The years 1846-47 are epoch-making in the economic history of England. 1756, pp 185 and 202. After the change it consists of £4,500 constant (£3,000 raw material and £1,500 machinery), and £1,500 variable capital. The only remedy that I, a republican on principle, can sug- gest, is to restore the old state of serfdom, to make slaves of all those who are unable to provide for their own subsistence." Eden, I.e., Book 1., ch. 1 On the contrary, a fall in the rate of surplus-value leaves unaltered the mass of the surplus-value produced, if the amount of the variable capital, or number of the labourers employed, increases in the same pro- portion. Now we have seen how that portion of v the constant cap- ital which consists of the instruments of labour, transfers to the production only fraction of its value, while the remainder of that THE RATE OP SURPLUS-VALUE 213 value continues to reside in those instruments. 3 1. [Note to 2nd edition. SECTION 2.— THE VALUE TRANSFERRED BY MACHINERY TO THE PRODUCT We saw that the productive forces resulting from co-opera- tion and division of labour cost capital nothing. . 2 1 "Corn and labour rarely march quite abreast; but there is an obvious limit, beyond which they cannot be separated. ... daily; and since then, the efficacy of the gin has been considerably increased. for a fortnight on end; could not do it any more." "George Allinsworth, age 9, came here as cellar-boy last Friday; next morning we had to be- gin at 3, so I stopped here all night. ("On the Economy of Machinery," pp. 14, note. etc.," t. The master's machinery" (which we now learn can be replaced with advantage in 12 months) "really plays a far more important part in the business of production than the labour and skill of the operative" (who cannot now be- replaced under 30 years), "which six months' education can teach, and a com- mon labourer can learn." (See ante, p. The new value actually created in the process, the value produced, or value-product, is therefore not the same as the value of the product; it is not, as it would at first sight appear (c+v)+s or £410 const. . So far from this being the case, the surplus-value, like the original capital, divides itself into constant capital and variable capital, into means of production and labour-power. Doubtless many small guild-masters, and yet more independent small artisans, or even wage-labourers, transformed themselves into small capitalists, and (by gradually extending exploitation of wage-labour and cor- responding accumulation) into full-blown capitalists. The subject of labour is in this case not a product of previous labour, but is furnished by Nature gratis, as in the case of metals, minerals, coal, stone, &c. It is this economic relation that determines the subject-matter comprised in each such juridical act. c, p. The fact that a number of sales take place simultaneously, and side by side, limits the extent to which coin can be replaced by the rapidity of currency. In the example we have taken, it is necessary that the value of labour- power should actually fall by one-tenth, in order that the necessary labour-time may be diminished by one-tenth, i.e., from ten hours to nine, and in order that the surplus-labour may consequently be prolonged from two hours to three. The augmentation of the rent of land subject to taxation (including houses, railways, mines, fisheries, &c), amounted for 1853 to 1864 to 38% or 3-^ % annu- ally. The pro- duction of the workshops of England is being increased by the use of improved tools and these tools are again served by a low class of labour. and he that gives him some other in exchange, cannot make a better estimate of what is a proper equiva- lent, than by computing what cost him just as much labour and time; which in effect is no more than exchanging one man's labour in one thing for a time certain, for another man's labour in another thing for the same time." (1. Really hard work during 12 or 14 hours of the day, or for any longer time, is too much for any human being." 2 In the workshops under the Factory Acts, piece-wage be- comes the general rule, because capital can there only increase the efficacy of the working-day by intensifying labour. That of the better situated handicraftsmen, with whom the machine competes, sinks. (10.) Northamptonshire Brinworth, Pickford and Floore: in these villages in the winter 20-30 men were lounging about the streets from want of work. Since the great mass of the Hindu population are peasants cultivating their land themselves, their products, their instruments of labour and means of subsistence never take "the shape of a fund saved from revenue, which fund has, therefore, gone through a previous proc- ess of accumulation." 2 On the other hand, the non-agricultural labourers in those provinces where the English rule has least- disturbed the old system, are directly employed by the mag- nates, to whom a portion of the agricultural surplus-product is ren- dered in the shape of tribute or rent. c, p. He again does not know that this extra pay in- cludes unpaid labour, just as well as does the price of the custom- ary hour of labour. viii., pp. "The Eco- nomic Position of the British Labourer." London, 1865, p. 1 This boundless greed after riches, this pas- sionate chase after exchange-value, 2 is common to the capitalist and the miser; but while the miser is merely a capitalist gone mad, the capitalist is a rational miser. 1 The machine proper is therefore a mechanism that, after being set in motion, performs with its tools the same operations that were formerly done by the workman with similar tools. Further: "By this in- crease the productive power of the machine will be augmented one-fifth. Les planteurs, ae pouvant obtenir de leurs sucres un prix suffisant pour couvrir la hausse de salaire, ont 6te obliges de fournir l'excedant, d'abord sur leurs profits, ensuite sur leurs capitaux memes. Such insipid childishness is every 714 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION day preached to us in the defence of property. A - B -G. (This same Peto, after 1867, came to an end a la Strousberg.) THE WORKING-DAY 235 tains his rights as a purchaser when he tries to make the work- ing-day as long as possible, and to make, whenever possible, two working-days out of one. 98-99. When, in 1790, the first census of slaves was taken in the United States, their number was 697,000; in 1861 it had nearly reached four millions. of yarn. 64,506 st. . . If one hour's labour is embodied in sixpence, a value of six shillings will be produced in a working-day of 12 hours. There is besides "a plague more horrible still, the great number of idiots." Now a word on the climatic conditions. Over yonder, in the colonies where the labourers are so "simple" as to "exploit" the capitalist, Mr. Molinari feels a strong itching to set the law of supply and demand, that works elsewhere automatically, on the right road by means of the police. m. In the course of our investi- gation we shall find, in general, that the characters who appear on the economic stage are but the personifications of the economic relations that exist between them. This certainty in the result, and this possibility of interrupting the work are, of course, easier to be attained in the purely me- chanical industries than in those in which chemical and physical processes play a part; as, for instance, in the earthenware trade, in bleaching, dyeing, baking, and in most of the metal industries. The separation of labour from its product, of subjective labour-power from the objective conditions of labour, was therefore the real foundation in fact, and the starting-point of capitalist production. Such a raw material, though itself a product, may have to go through a whole series of different processes: in each of these in turn, it serves, with constantly varying form, as raw material, until the last process of the series leaves it a perfect product, ready for individual consumption, or for use as an in- strument of labour. In the manufacture of matches it was thought to be an indispensable requirement, that boys, even while bolting their dinner, should go on dipping the matches in melted phosphorus, the poisonous vapour from which rose into their faces. If the rate of surplus-value doubles, or the working-day, instead of being extended from 6 to 9, is extended from 6 to 12 hours and at the same time variable capital is lessened by half, and reduced to 150s., it yields also a surplus-value of 150s. part on the helpless condition of some groups of the working-class, a condi- tion that prevents them from exacting equally with the rest the value of their labour-power. With those, for example, whose value rises, simultaneously with, and proportionally to, that of money, there is no alteration in price. That portion of the working-class, thus by machinery rendered superfluous, i. Our capitalist stares in astonishment. The deer in the parks of the great are demurely do- mestic cattle, fat as London aldermen. 1 The consumption of labour-power by capital is, besides, so rapid that the labourer, half-way through his life, has already more or less completely lived himself out. In spite of this, however, they do not let their government cradle itself in illusions. In order to put it on an equal footing with all other commodities in this respect, we should be obliged to equate it to itself as its own equivalent. 4 1 On 2 modern power-looms a weaver now makes in a week of 60 hours 26 pieces of certain quality, length, and breadth; while on the old power- looms he could make no more than 4 such pieces. We have seen that when commodities are exchanged, their exchange-value manifests itself as something totally independent of their use-value. Labour-time continues to transmit as before 410 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION the same value to the total product, but this unchanged amount of exchange-value is spread over more use-values; hence the value of each single commodity sinks. It is itself an eco- nomic power. If 1 Although the rate of surplus-value is an exact expression for the de- gree of exploitation of labour-power, it is, in no sense, an expression for the absolute amount of exploitation. The state-creditors actually give nothing away, for the sum lent is transformed into public bonds, easily negotiable, which go on functioning in their hands just as so much hard cash would. The consequences were, according to the medical report we received, that in the night-time these poor people were compelled to endure all the horror of suffocation to avoid the pestiferous smells arising from the filthy, stagnant water, and the privies close under their win- dows. The exchange of commodities, therefore, first begins on the boundaries of such communities, at their points of contact with other similar communities, or with members of the latter. 153.) 2 David Urquhart remarks in his "Familiar Words" on the monstros- ity (!) that now-a-days a pound (sterling), which is the unit of the English standard of money, is equal to about a quarter of an ounce of gold. If you abolish the knife — you hurl us back into the depths of barbarism." 2 Although machinery necessarily throws men out of work in those industries into which it is introduced, yet it may, not- withstanding this, bring about an increase of employment in other industries. . It follows therefore that the daily and weekly wages, &c, may remain the same, although the price of labour falls constant- ly. Nevertheless he doubted the use of steam-engines in navigation. 490 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION outside the domestic sphere, to women, to young persons, and to children of both sexes, creates a new economic foundation for a higher form of the family and of the relations between the sexes. The result of the whole transaction, as regards the weaver, is this, that instead of being in possession of the linen, he now has the Bible; instead of his original commodity, he now possesses another of the same value but of different utility. 18.) A The "open-air bleachers" had evaded the law of 1860, by means of the lie that no women worked at it in the night. . 2 The fact that money can, in certain functions, be replaced by mere symbols of itself, gave rise to that other mistaken notion, that it is itself a mere symbol. Arrivabene. Whoever directly satisfies his wants with the produce of his own labour, creates, indeed, use-values, but not commodities. "A Treatise of Taxes and Contri- butions." Lond., 1667, p. c, p. But with the development of circulation, conditions arise under which the alienation of commodities becomes separated, by an sui quali si raggirauo tutte le operazioni di economia politica." (Verri, 1. IV. About a year ago, Mr. Jay promised to appropriate a hut, to which persons in his employ, who were suffering from conta- gious diseases, might at once be removed. 242. =3s. In the production of a definite mass of surplus-value, there- fore, the decrease of one factor may be compensated by the in- crease of the other. (c) to the amount of £400; and of wages (v) to the amount of £100; and further, that the surplus-value (s) =£100. At the end of the process, we do not receive with one hand the origi- nal £100, and with the other, the surplus-value of £10. Even its individual consumption is, within certain limits, a mere factor in the process of production. This movement is simply indicated here, as the analysis of competition does not be- long to this part of our subject. c, p. * M — C, or purchase. On the other hand, because a part of what is now surplus- labour, would then count as necessary labour; I mean the labour of forming a fund for reserve and accumulation. 722.) "Have you ever heard of any workman objecting to employ a boy between 10 and 12, who could not write or read?" "It is not left to men's option." (n. If we take the statements of Arthur Young, a careful observ- er, though a superficial thinker, as to the agricultural labourer of 1771, the latter plays a very pitiable part compared with his predecessor of the end of the 14th century, "when the labourer . The coat is a use-value that satisfies a particular want. Wakefield— says: "The peasant of the South of England ... The supervision and enforcement of this law are, in a country where every mouse is under police administration, left to the good-will of the amis du commerce. An epoch-making work in the history of Political Economy. 54.) The author, an uncommonly self-satis- fied wiseacre, is right in his confusion and therefore in his contention, to this extent only, that neither Ricardo nor any other economist, before or since him, has accurately distinguished the two aspects of labour, and still less, therefore, the part played by it under each of these aspects in the for- mation of value. If we look at the means of production, in their relation to the creation of value, and to the variation in the quantity of value, apart from anything else, they appear simply as the material in which labour-power, the value- creator, incorporates itself. The working-time here includes, be- sides the 24 hours of the 6 working-days, a great part also of the 24 hours of Sunday. . At the dawn of civilisation the productiveness acquired by labour is small, but so too are the wants which de- velop with and by the means of satisfying them. The constant tendency of capital is to force the cost of labour back towaids this zero. 1815, p. The foundation of every division of labour that is well devel- oped, and brought about by the exchange of commodities, is the separation between town and country. Insp. COMMODITIES 83 system, does not its superstition come out as clear as noon-day, whenever it treats of capital? Comm. This antago- nism between the quantitative limits of money and its qualita- tive boundlessness, continually acts as a spur to the hoarder in his Sisyphus-like labour of accumulating. Nevertheless, even when circumstances allow the law to operate, subsidiary movements may occur. These profits not only form a source of accelerated accumulation, but also attract into the favoured sphere of production a large part of the additional social capital that is being constantly created, and is ever on the look-out for new investments. But capital, as was said earlier, is at first indifferent as to the technical character of the labour- process; it begins by taking it just as it finds it. Proudhon's socialism is a working out of this Philis- tine Utopia, a form of socialism which, as I have elsewhere shown, does not possess even the merit of originality. c, p. And how does he fare in the mill? The expansion by fits and starts of the scale of production is the preliminary to its equally sudden contraction; the latter again evokes the former, but the former is impossible without dispos- able human material, without an increase in the number of la- bourers independently of the absolute growth of the population. But as regards labour in the so-called domestic industries and the intermediate forms between them and Manufacture, so soon as limits are put to the working-day and to the employment of children, those in- dustries go to the wall. of Insp. 586.) MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OP COMMODITIES HI cles. 294.) "Do you merely want more inspectors, or do you want a lower class of men as an inspector?" "A man who would knock about, and see that things are kept right; a man who would not be afraid of himself." (n. 4 The development of the factory system fixes a constantly increasing portion of the capital in a form, in which, on the one hand, its value is capable of continual self-expansion, and in which, on the other hand, it loses both use- value and exchange-value whenever it loses contact with living labour. Dr. Julian Hunter was therefore commissioned to investigate this phenom- enon on the spot. The value of a thing consists solely in its relation to our wants. . Not a fibre of it is changed, but anew social soul has popped into its body. Of course, this labour-power, which remains the same under all its modifications, must have attained a certain pitch of development before it can be expended in a multiplicity of modes. And, even to the present day, Liverpool "respectability" is the Pindar of the slave-trade which — com- pare the work of Aikin [1795] already quoted — "has coincided with that spirit of bold adventure which has characterised the trade of Liverpool and rapidly carried it to its present state of prosperity; has occasioned vast employment for shipping and sailors, and greatly augmented the demand for the manufactures of the country" (p. . m., 3 with pauses of not less than 1— hours for meal-times, these meal-times to be allowed at one and the same time for all, and conformably to the conditions of 1844. These allotments are at a distance from the houses, which are without privies. The rent was payable weekly, whether the looms worked or not. * The minimum of the sum of value that the individual posses- sor of money or commodities must command, in order to meta- morphose himself into a capitalist, changes with the different stages of development of capitalist production, and is at given stages dif- ferent in different spheres of production, according to their special and technical conditions. It is that confinement of the revenues which feed them, to one or a few hands, which makes such undertakings possible." ' This power of Asiatic and Egyptian kings, Etruscan theocrats, &c, has in modern society been transferred to the capitalist, whether he be an isolated, or as in joint-stock companies, a collective capitalist. d. 392 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION for separating the wool from the seed, an instrument, half machine, half tool, called a churka; with this one man and a woman can clean 28 lbs. When one commodity, such as a coat, serves as the equivalent of another, such as linen, and coats consequently acquire the characteristic property of being directly exchangeable with linen, we are far from knowing in what proportion the two are ex- changeable. To exchange £100 for cotton, and then this same cotton again for £100, is merely a roundabout way of exchanging money for money, the same for the same, and 150 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION appears to be an operation just as purposeless as it is absurd. .. The pretended Ten Hours' Act, was thus simple hum- bug, parliamentary cheating, had never existed! The Factory Inspectors urgently warned the Government that the antago- nism of classes had arrived at an incredible tension. 6 1. But the quantity of labour spent on its production has altered. The value of commodities is in inverse ratio to the produc- tiveness of labour. The Metamorphosis of Commodities We saw in a former chapter that the exchange of commodi- ties implies contradictory and mutually exclusive conditions. 216 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION quantity of surplus-value produced. In the last decades of the 17th century it had already been shown that money is a commodity, but this step marks only the infancy of the analysis. 2 From the report of the Commissioners in 1863, the following: Dr. J. see what evils will attend the lim- iting to 10 hours the working of the factory. And yet, whether the merchant who has paid £100 for his cotton sells it for £110, or lets it go for £100, or even £50, his money has, at all events, gone through a characteristic and original movement, quite different in kind from that which it goes through in the hands of the peas- ant who sells corn, and with the money thus set free buys clothes. We do not pause longer on the beauty of this system, as we shall have to return to it later. 135. Or better still. In both cases, it is, so to say, the special business of each single commodity to find an expression for its value, and this it does without the help of the others. What distinguishes this form from that of the simple circulation of commodities, is the inverted order of succession of the two antithetical processes, sale and purchase. of yarn. 2 2 4 " 11. He who converts his rev- enue abstains from the enjoyment which its expenditure would afford him. 13.) "The effect of the Fact. Senior, who may be called the bel-esprit of English economists, well known, alike for his economic "science," and for his beautiful style, was summoned from Oxford to Manchester, to learn in the latter place, the Political Economy that he taught in the former. The pretext was shown on subsequent investigation to be a deliberate lie. Our capitalist foresaw this state of things, and that was the cause of his laughter. THE WORKING-DAY 243 It is evident that in this atmosphere the formation of surplus- value by surplus-labour, is no secret. 3 1. This Act was a complete dead letter owing to the ridic- ulously small number of inspectors, the meagreness of their powers, and other causes that will become apparent as we proceed. 132.) These open villages form, in fact, the "penal settlements" of the English agricultural proletariat. represent the value of the raw material, the 20s. EXPORT OF WOOL FROM AUSTRALIA TO GREAT BRITAIN. 16. Everywhere the farmers were howling, and the London Econo- mist, with reference to these starvation-wages, prattled quite seriously of "a general and substantial advance." 1 What did the farmers do now? This question un- consciously substituted itself in Political Economy for the original one; for the search after the cost of production of labour as such turned in a circle and never left the spot. Justices of the peace, on information, are to hunt the rascals down. According to capitalistic anthropology, the age of childhood ended at 10, or at the outside, at 11. Within the sphere of home circulation, there can be but one commodity which, by serving as a measure of value, becomes money. The money with which such a class is constantly making purchases, must constantly flow into their pockets, without any exchange, gratis, by might or right, from the pockets of the commodity-owners themselves. 2 "The course of trade being thus turned, from exchanging of goods for goods, or delivering and taking, to selling and paying, all the bargains ... The men employed by the underselling masters (who sell their bread under the 'full price,' and who, as already pointed out, comprise three- fourths of the London bakers) have not only to work on the average longer hours, but their work is almost entirely confined to the bakehouse. "The diet of the English prisons [is] superior to that of ordinary labourers in England." No. 50. At my asking for an explanation of this from a manufacturer, he gave me the following: 'Under the old system I employed 63 persons; after the introduction of im- proved machinery I reduced my hands to 33, and lately, in consequence of new and extensive alterations. c, p. The a priori system on which the division of labour, within the workshop, is regularly carried out, becomes in the division of labour within the society, an a posteriori, nature-imposed necessity, controlling the lawless caprice of the producers, and perceptible in the baro- metrical fluctuations of the market-prices. At the same time it also makes the accomplishment of this transubstantiation quite accidental. c, pp. Education of the masses, he urges, violates the first law of the division of labour, and with it "our whole social system would be proscribed." "Like all other divisions of labour," he says, "that between hand labour and head labour 4 is more pro- 1 A. His walls are of mud and stones, his floor the bare earth which was there before the hut was built, his roof a mass of loose and sodden thatch. All their villages were destroyed and burnt, 1 1. In manufacture the workmen are parts of a living mechanism. in reality teed both the pensioners ... 7yd. 2 "Reports, &c, for 31 Oct., 1862," p. CM „h? Children beginning work before 12 noon may not be again em- ployed after 1 p. c, p. The reason of this is easily comprehensible. Linen = coat is the basis of the equation. . 80.) The French Twelve Hours' Bill of September 5th, 1850, a bourgeois edition of the decree of the Provisional Government of March 2nd, 1848, holds in all workshops without exceptions. 3 Turgot in his "Reflexions sur la Formation et la Distribution des Richesses" (1766) brings well into prominence the importance of domesti- cated animals to early civilisation. c, "First Preliminary Discourse," p 14. and 3 / 4 d. m. From the instant he steps into the workshop, the use-value of his labour-power, and therefore also its use, which is labour, be- longs to the capitalist. ?" "I believe they would." (n. The mystical character of commodities does not originate, therefore, in their use-value. 7, n. At one time they try agriculture, at another they take to commerce, at an- other they busy themselves with two or three occupations at once. The difference strikes one at once, even in those cases where man himself continues to be the prime mover. Of cities and townes either utterly decaied or more than a quarter or half diminished, though some one be a little increased here or there; of townes pulled downe for sheepe-walks, and no more but the lordships now standing in them ... The coal burnt under the boiler vanishes without leaving a trace; so, too, the tallow with which the axles of wheels are greased. 2 "Si I'argent represente, dans nos mains, les choses que nous pouvons desirer d'acheter, il y represente aussi les choses que nous avons vendues pour cet argent." (Mercier de la Riviere, 1. 33, ed. Under the conditions assumed in I. — F E.\ MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OF COMMODITIES 145 The current of the stream of gold and silver is a double one. Many manufacturers employ upwards of 3,000 of these lace-makers, who are chiefly children and young persons of the female sex exclusively. systematically deluding and leading them (the labourers) astray in order to render their muscular powers entirely mechanical and obedient." (W. Further, the fewer the processes the cotton has gone through, the more certain is this result. he may do great damage to the whole." 2 Hence throughout the whole manufacturing period there runs the complaint of want of discipline among the workmen. Hence, machinery squeezes itself into the manufacturing industries first for one detail process, then for another. 119.) Hegel held very heretical views on division of labour. In the one case the relative value of the linen is expressed in the coat, in the other case the relative value of the coat is expressed in the linen. " 3 The Inquiry-Commission of 1861 led, however, to the unexpected result, that in some purely agricultural districts bordering on the North Sea, the death-rate of children under one year old almost equalled that of the worst factory districts. The farmers have discovered that women work steadily only under the direc- tion of men, but that women and children, once set going, im- petuously spend their life-force— as Fourier knew — while the adult male labourer is shrewd enough to economise his as much as he can. 3. ... and 4s. * "Rep. Like the increased exploitation of natural wealth by the mere increase in the tension of labour-power, science and technol- ogy give capital a power of expansion independent of the given magnitude of the capital actually functioning. With reference to the proposed alteration of the law, Mr. Ellis says: "I do not think it would be very objectionable to require that no person under the age of 18 should work more than 12 hours in the 24. For slave-trade read labour-market, for Kentucky and Virginia, Ireland and the agricultural districts of England, Scotland, and Wales, for Africa, Germany. In this chapter we have, so far, treated it solely as a fund for accumulation. Thus* the linen, for instance, first of all changes its commodity-form into its money-form. He supposes, however, an approximately equal progress in the Continental countries mentioned, so that the numbers given would still have their value for purposes of comparison. . of coffee = [» 2 ounces of gold 1 qr. or further into the night. . Ten hours were necessary for the reproduction of the value of the labour-power; now only six are required. 1 "Whether the united skill, industry, and emulation of many together on the same work be not the way to advance it? This character comes and goes with the momentary social acts that called it into life. M. 1 From the law of the rapidity of currency of the means of payment, it follows that the quantity of the means of payment required for all periodical payments, whatever their source, is in inverse proportion to the length of their periods. But suppose the seller of the Bible turns the £2 set free by the weaver into brandy M— C, the concluding phase of C— M— C (linen, money, Bible), is also C — M, the first phase of C — M — G (Bible, money, brandy). value... m. Of these variations we shall consider those alone that have been the most important in the history of prices. p. There- upon began the consignment of goods to India and China, thus naturally making the glut more intense. Wherever I refer to the composi- tion of capital, without further qualification, its organic com- position is always understood. For the price of land in London is always very high in comparison with its yearly revenue, and therefore every buyer speculates on getting rid of it again at a jury price (the expropriation valuation fixed by jurymen), or on pocketing an extraordinary increase of value arising from the neighbourhood of some large establishment. 379,213 451,569 401,064 Hence, between 1861 and 1868, 338 cotton factories disap- peared, in other words more productive machinery on a larger scale was concentrated in the hands of a smaller number of cap- italists. "The first school we visited was kept by a Mrs. Here we contemplate the labour as producing a par- ticular article; we view it under its qualitative aspect alone, with regard to its end and aim. 2 1. ... One of the most recent Blue books on mines is the "Report from the Select Committee on Mines, together with &c. Say as to the no- tion of value. Then they employed slaves in agriculture and cattle-breed- ing, because freemen would have been taken from labour for military serv- ice. Thousands of Irish fam- ilies, who according to the testimony of the English, eaten up as these are with national prejudice, are notable for their rare at- tachment to the domestic hearth, for their gaiety and the purity of their home-life, found themselves suddenly transplanted into hotbeds of vice. If on our earlier assumption the capitalist must advance 300s., in order to exploit 100 labourers a day, and if the rate of sur- plus-value amounts to 50%, this variable capital of 300s. Dans cette direction, l'espece humaine s'eleve aux plus hautes conceptions du genie, penetre dans les profondeurs myste- rieuses de la religion, etablit les principes salutaires de la morale (which consists in 's'approprier tous les bienfaits,' &c), les lois tutelaires de la li- berte (liberty of 'les classes condamnees a produire?') et du pouvoir, de l'obe- issance et de la justice, du devoir et de l'humanite." For this twaddle see "Des Systemes d'Economie Politique. The con- tract by which he sold to the capitalist his Labour-power proved, so to say, in black and white that he disposed of himself freely. . Take away the cream of the workers, and fixed capital will depreciate in a great degree, and the floating will not subject itself to a struggle with the short supply of inferior labour.... If the value of those necessaries represent on an average the expenditure of six hours' labour," the workman must on an average work for six hours to produce that value. What it reduced to bond- age in this case, was not the Dutchman, but the land for the Dutchman. But according as these private individuals are labourers or not labourers, private property has a different character. 919), which amounts to saying "qu'une valeur vaut plus qu'une valeur egale. 171 . And 1 "As a reduction in their hours of work would cause a larger number (of children) to be employed, it was thought that the additional supply of children from 8 to 9 years of age would meet the increased demand" (1. As capitalist produc- tion, accumulation, and wealth, become developed, the capital- ist ceases to be the mere incarnation of capital. to 5s. In the same way the light from an object is perceived by us not as the subjective excitation of our optic nerve, but as the objective form of something outside the eye itself. The general form of value, C, results from the joint action of the whole world of commodities, and from that alone. "During the working part of the week six hours is the utmost unbroken period ever attained at any one time for rest, and out of this has to come the time spent in coming and going to and from work, washing, dressing, and meals, leav- ing a very short period indeed for rest, and none for fresh air and play, unless at the expense of the sleep necessary for young boys, especially at such hot and fatiguing work... 486.) MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OF COMMODITIES 131 Gold and silver thus become of themselves social expressions for superfluity or wealth. Just as at first the capitalist is relieved from actual la- bour so soon as his capital has reached that minimum amount with which capitalist production, as such, begins, so now, he hands over the work of direct and constant supervision of the individual workmen, and groups of workmen, to a special kind of wage-la- bourer. And it is under this form, that the English government purchases opium from the ryots of India.... And would not such a history be easier to compile, since, as Vico says, human history differs from natural history in this, that we have made the. The productiveness of labour depends not only on the profi- ciency of the workman, but on the perfection of his tools. . 185. 55. Just as every art that is not a means to an end, but an end in itself, has no limit to its aims, because it seeks con- stantly to approach nearer and nearer to that end, while those arts that pur- sue means to an end, are not boundless, since the goal itself imposes a limit upon them, so with Chrematistic, there are no bounds to its aims, these aims being absolute wealth. Here, on the contrary, where we con- THE LABOUR-PROCESS 189 sider the labour of the spinner only so far as it is value-creating, i.e., a source of value, his labour differs in no respect from the la- bour of the man who bores cannon, or (what here more nearly con- cerns us), from the labour of the cotton-planter and spindle-maker incorporated in the means of production. These gentlemen would do well, to ponder, once in a way, over Spinoza's: "Determinate est Negatio." 1 Senior, 1. Thus the hours of rest were turned into hours of enforced idleness, which drove the youths to the pot-house, and the girls to the brothel. It is not our intention to consider, here, the way in which the laws, immanent in capitalist production, manifest themselves in the movements of individual masses of capital, where they assert themselves as coercive laws of competition, and are brought home to the mind and consciousness of the individual capitalist as the di- recting motives of his operations. 50. Eden refutes his own crafty special pleading, in which he tries to represent com- munal property as the private property of the great landlords who have taken the place of the feudal lords, when he, himself, 1 Read, e.g., E. 130-133, n. The tithe to be rendered to the priest is more matter of fact than his blessing. On the other side of the channel, in Scotland, the agricultural labourer, the plough- man, protests against his 13-14 hours' work in the most in- clement climate, with 4 hours' additional work on Sunday (in this land of Sabbatarians!), 1 whilst, at the same time, three railway men are standing before a London coroner's jury— a guard, an engine-driver, a signalman. When an individual appropriates natural objects for his livelihood, no one controls him but himself. The value of one pound of yarn being eighteenpence, if our capitalist buys 10 lbs. In those of the simplest form, the land is tilled in common, and the produce divided among the members. 768 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION "In the Northern States of the American Union, it may be doubted whether so many as a tenth of the people would fall under the description of hired labourers .... In all cases, therefore, the use-value of the labour-power is advanced to the capitalist: the labourer allows the buyer to consume it before he receives payment of the price; he everywhere gives credit to the capitalist. c, p. 22. As a periodic increment of the capital ad- vanced, or periodic fruit of capital in process, surplus-value acquires the form of a revenue flowing out of capital. Smith's Wealth of Nations." Edinburgh, 1814, vol. 182 (present edition, p. After thus proving clearly, that even if capitalist production had no existence, still it would always exist, Mill is consistent enough to show, on the contrary, that it has no existence, even when it does exist. E.) THE RATE OF SURPLUS-VALUE 217 I call "necessary" labour-time, and the labour expended during that time I call "necessary" labour. As the law of 1833 left it optional with the lords of capital during the 15 hours, from 5.30 a. Tools, machines, workshops, and vessels, are of use in the labour-proc- ess, only so long as they retain their original shape, and are ready each morning to renew the process with their shape unchanged. The doubling spindles, too, are no longer included in the spinning spindles (as was the case in the "Returns" of 1839, 1850, and 1856); further, in the case of woollen mills, the number of "gigs" is added, a distinc- tion made between jute and hemp mills on the one hand and flax mills on the other, and finally stocking-weaving is for the first time inserted in the report. The labourers of the towns were driven en masse into the country, and gave an impulse, never before seen, to the petite culture, carried on in the form of gardening. This quantity of labour forms the value of a day's labour-power or the value of the labour-power daily reproduced. It is very characteristic that the enthusiastic apologists of the factory system have nothing more damning to urge against a general organisation of the labour of society, than that it would turn all society into one immense fac- tory. 2 By means of machinery t 1 In the celebrated "Livre des metiers" of Etienne Boileau, we find it prescribed that a journeyman on being admitted among the masters had to swear "to love his brethren with brotherly love, to support them in their respective trades, not wilfully to betray the secrets of the trade, and besides, in the interests of all, not to recommend his own wares by calling the atten- tion of the buyer to defects in the articles made by others." 2 "The bourgeoisie cannot exist without continually revolutionising the instruments of production, and thereby the relations of production and all the social relations. That is why you bought it. The capitalist main- 1 During the great strike of the London builders, 1860-61, for the reduction of the working-day to 9 hours, their Committee published a mani- festo that contained, to some extent, the plea of our worker. can really be effectual unless the population themselves assist in putting it into operation?" "Many a man might wish to object to employing a boy, but he would perhaps become marked by it." (n. 1821, p. II., p. above all in training human beings to renounce their desultory habits of work, and to identify themselves with the unvarying regularity of the complex automaton. on Saturday afternoons." 1 "The profit to be gained by it (over-working in violation of the Act) appears to be, to many, a greater temptation than they can resist; they calculate upon the chance of not being found out; and when they see the small amount of penalty and costs, which those who have been convicted have had to pay, they find that if they should be detected there will still be a considerable balance of gain. The following table shows the dis- tribution of the profits (with the exception of those of farmers) for the years 1864 and 1865: — Table E SCHEDULE D. The production and circulation of commodi- ties are, however, phenomena that occur to a greater or less extent in modes of production the most diverse. And this loss becomes positive and absolute as soon as the intermission of their employment necessitates additional outlay at the recommencement of work. But there was a nominal reduction, of which the operatives, it is asserted, had not fair warning beforehand." 3 "Trades' Unions, in their desire to maintain wages, endeavour to share in the benefits of improved machinery. Secondly, with regard to that which forms the ground-work for the quantitative determination of value, namely, the duration of that expenditure, or the quantity of labour, it is quite clear that there is a palpable difference between its quantity and quality. Econ. . In agriculture the land under cultivation cannot be increased without the advance of more seed and manure. Is their black-market, their lash, and their barter of human flesh more detestable than this slow sacrifice of humanity which takes place in order that veils and collars may be fabricated for the benefit of capitalists?" 1 The potteries of Staffordshire have, during the last 22 years, been the subject of three parliamentary inquiries. The mode of expression, you see, is everything. Their numbers have consider- ably increased during the last three or four years, (n.1727.) They are mostly the wives, daughters, and widows of the working miners, and their ages range from 12 to 50 or 60 years, (ns. . The one, as well as the other, is laid out by the capitalist in the purchase of commodities that place him in a position to begin afresh the fabrication of his goods, and this time, on an extended scale. 885.) * Here (from "Thus the linen..." to "commodities in general," p. Report," p. Pierre Dupont in his "Ouvriers" sang: Mai vetus, loges dans des trous, Sous les combles, dans les decombres, Nous vivons avec les hiboux Et les larrons, amis des ombres. If we take away the useful labour expended upon them, a mate- rial substratum is always left, which is furnished by Nature without the help of man. Factory legislation is therefore brought to a dead-lock before these 500 cubic feet of breathing space. For, again and again in phrases so uniform that they seem stereotyped, reporters on the spread of epidemic disease in rural districts, have insisted on the extreme importance of that over-crowding, as an influ- ence which renders it a quite hopeless task, to attempt the limit- ing of any infection which is introduced. Birmingham has the monopoly of this industry in the United Kingdom, and at present produces thousands of millions of steel- pens. It, in fact, trans- forms, within certain limits, the labourer's necessary consumption- fund into a fund for the accumulation of capital. They extorted the privilege they de- sired. 32. On the other hand, however, this extra surplus-value vanishes, so soon as the new method of production has become general, and has consequently caused the difference be- tween the individual value of the cheapened commodity and its social value to vanish. What we have said with reference to merchants' capital applies still more to money-lenders' capital. It may be called primitive accumulation, because it is the historic basis, instead of the historic result of specifically capitalist production. 2 The decrease of the middle-class farmers can be seen especially in the census category: "Farmer's son, grandson, brother, nephew, daughter, grand-daughter, sister, niece"; in a word, the members of his own family, em- ployed by the farmer. Empl. Here then he sets himself systematically to work to form an industrial reserve force that shall be ready at a moment's notice; during one part of the year he decimates this force by the most inhuman toil, during the other part, he lets it starve for want of work. "In hac urbe," says Boxhorn (Inst. 1691, pp. 1 The word pound, for instance, was the money-name given to an actual pound weight of silver. Once arrived at this ex- treme limit, the least rise in the price of food, stoppage of work, illness, increases the labourer's distress and determines his com- plete ruin; debts accumulate, credit fails, the most necessary clothes and furniture are pawned, and finally, the family asks to be enrolled on the list of paupers." (Ducpetiaux, 1. Their change of value is seen as soon as they are compared with a third commodity, whose value has remained constant. But— but — 1 1. Whilst in prison they are to be whipped as much and as often as the justices of the peace think fit. 2 The introduction of this and other machinery into match-making caused in one department alone 230 young persons to be replaced by 32 boys and girls of 14 to 17 years of age. Other things being equal, his commodities can command a more extended market only by a diminution of their prices. The same use-value is both the product of a previous process, and a means of pro- duction in a later process. 1855.— 1 in 18. How then to find this price, i.e., the money-value of a given quantity of labour? 2 "Its (labour's) natural price ... On the other hand, the use of a given commodity, of a house, for instance, is sold (in common parlance, let) for a definite period. Labour being as proper for the bodies' health as eating is for its living; for what pains a man saves by ease, he will find in disease. x Ricardo was the first who accurately formulated the three laws we have above stated. If the labourer receives 3s., then he receives the value of his labour- power functioning through 12 hours. 3 or ., , —3- can therefore never Working-day Value created 100 100-f-x reach the limit of 77^, still less rise to ,ZL . The original capital has now changed from C to C', from £500 to £590. A part of the agricultural labourers which, however, grows less day by day, dwells still on the holdings of the farmers in over-crowded huts, whose hideous- ness far surpasses the worst that the English agricultural labourers offered us in this way. Forcible reduction of wages below this value plays, however, in practice too important a part, for us not to pause upon it for a moment. 1 In the expression "value of labour," the idea of value is not only completely obliterated, but actually reversed. In the earliest period of human history domesticated animals, i.e., animals which have been bred for the purpose, and have undergone modi- fications by means of labour, play the chief part as instruments of labour along with specially prepared stones, wood, bones, and shells. The form of wood, for instance, is altered, by making a table out of it. 2 Now, the same children and young persons were shifted from the spinning-room to the weaving-room, now, during 15 hours, from one factory to another. Gerhardt in 1843, each series of which has its own general algebraic formula. have both gone hand in hand in keeping the labourer down." 2 It is then proved in detail that the real agri- cultural wages between 1737 and 1777 fell nearly -7- or 25 per cent. 2 The gang-system obtains almost exclusively in the counties of Lincoln, Huntingdon, Cambridge, Norfolk, Suffolk, and Not- tingham, here and there in the neighbouring counties of North- ampton, Bedford, and Rutland. A capital of 300s. Thus, we have a result absurd at first sight— that labour which creates a value of 6s. But behind this apparent rise, is hidden an actual fall in wages, for it does not correspond at all to the rise in price of the necessary means of subsistence that has taken place in the meantime. For instance, the attendance on one day might be from 8 to 11 a. When the machinery, as a whole, forms a system of manifold machines, working simultaneously and in concert, the co-opera- tion based upon it, requires the distribution of various groups of workmen among the different kinds of machines. . 57.) 598 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION same way that the Georgian slave-owner was lately delivered, by the abolition of slavery, from the painful dilemma, whether to squander the surplus-product, lashed out of his niggers, entirely in champagne, or whether to reconvert a part of it into more nig- gers and more land. COMPULSORY LAWS FOR THE EXTENSION OF THE WORKING-DAY FROM THE MIDDLE OF THE 14TH TO THE END OF THE 17TH CENTURY "What is a working-day? 149: "He (Adam Smith) passes over without remark the question as to the quantity of coin in circulation, and treats money quite wrongly as a mere commodity." This statement applies only in so far as Adam Smith, ex offi- cio, treats of money. If the growth of the quantity produced is occasionally mentioned, this is only done with reference to the greater abundance of use-values. The state of health of this cheap material for exploitation will be seen from the following table, computed by Dr. Trueman, physician to the Nottingham General Dispensary. Between 1769 and 1770, the English manufactured a famine by buying up all the rice and refusing to sell it again, except at fabulous prices. But, so far as he is personified capital, it is not values in use and the enjoyment of them, but exchange-value and its augmentation, that spur him into action. (Jean Law: "Considerations sur le numeraire et le commerce" in E. 22, and xi. On our supposition, however, he would have to employ two labourers in order to live, on the surplus-value appropriated daily, as well as, and no better than a labourer, i.e., to be able to satis- fy his necessary wants. Your workpeople will in future spend one hour and a half less time in reproducing or replacing the capital that has been advanced.— If, on the other hand, he did not believe them with- out further inquiry, but, as being an expert in such matters, deemed an analysis necessary, then he ought, in a question that is concerned exclusively with the relations of net profit to the length of the working-day, before all things to have asked the manufacturers, to be careful not to lump together machinery, workshops, raw material, and labour, but to be good enough to place the constant capital, invested in buildings, machinery, raw material, &c, on one side of the account, and the capital ad- vanced in wages on the other side. Now they reversed the medal. (What generosity!) There is no waste of pa- per and colour to speak of. "The real earnings of the cotton weaver are now far less than they were; his superiority over the common labourer, which at first was very great, has now almost entirely ceased. He still works in his old handicraft-like way. of yarn, the value transferred from the cotton is six times as great as before. II. 18, Note.— The Relieving Officer of the Chapel-en-le-Frith Union reported to the Registrar-General as follows: — "At Doveholes, a number of small excavations have been made into a large hillock of lime ashes (the refuse of lime-kilns), and which are used as dwellings, and occu- pied by labourers and others employed in the construction of a railway now in course of construction through that neighbourhood. The linen, which in his eyes is a mere commodity, a depos- itory of value, he alienates in exchange for gold, which is the linen's value-form, and this form he again parts with for another commodity, the Bible, which is destined to enter his house as an object of utility and of edification to its inmates. - p- i. M. I shall return to this letter later on; in spite of its erroneous theory of rent, it sees through the nature of capitalist production. Only a few parts of the watch pass through several hands; and all these membra disjecta come togeth- er for the first time in the hand that binds them into one mechan- ical whole. Yarn with which we neither weave nor knit, is cotton wasted. . c, pp. Lincolnshire will serve us as an example. A step further, and he will, perhaps, discover that the one evil in capitalist production is capital itself. The working-class was everywhere proclaimed, 1 p. In the "Letters on the Factory Act," he makes the whole net gains including "profit" and "interest," and even "some- thing more," depend upon a single unpaid hour's work of the labourer. Here, however, the analogy ceases. His natural wants, such as food, clothing, fuel, and housing, vary according to the climatic and other physical conditions of his country. Hence the negro labour in the Southern States of the American Union preserved something of a patriarchal character, so long as production was chiefly directed to immediate local consumption. They caused "15 lbs. As soon as capitalist production takes possession of agri- culture, and in proportion to the extent to which it does so, the demand for an agricultural labouring population falls absolutely, while the accumulation of the capital employed in agriculture advances, without this repulsion being, as in non-agricultural industries, compensated by a greater attraction. The separation of property from labour has become the necessary consequence of a law that apparently originated in their identity. Look at it,' she said, almost fiercely,, bringing out a bank-book with all its well-kept entries of money paid in, and money taken out, so that we could see how the little fortune had begun with the first five shilling deposit, and had grown by little and little to be twenty pounds, and how it had melted down again till the sum in hand got from pounds to shillings, and the last entry made the book as worthless as a blank sheet. Cf. Fourth Report (1865), 61, p. . x The result, in which the phases of the process vanish, is the exchange of money for money, M— M. The more a country starts its development on the foundation of modern industry, like the United States, for example, the more rapid is this process of destruction. When once we know this, such a mode of expression does no harm; it simply serves as an abbreviation. The seller's commodity circulates, and realises its price, but only in the shape of a legal claim upon money. For, according to our previous analysis, the value of the constant capital re-appears in the value of the product, but does not enter into the newly produced value, the newly cre- ated value-product. 2. The wage-worker of to- day is to-morrow an independent peasant, or artisan, working for himself. 84 CHAPTER II EXCHANGE It is plain that commodities cannot go to market and make exchanges of their own account. Geddes, a glass manufacturer, still extensively prevail. It is otherwise in the circulation M— C— M, which at first sight appears purposeless, because tautological. On the one hand, therefore, the additional capital formed in the course of accumulation attracts fewer and fewer labourers in proportion to its magnitude. c. . relating to Transportation and Penal Servitude," Lond., 1863, pp. Freytag.) 740 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION Parliament ordered that the wages of the Scotch miners should continue to be regulated by a statute of Elizabeth and two Scotch acts of 1661 and 1671. 137.) A member of the rural police who had for many years been a de- tective in the worst quarters of London, says of the girls of his village: "their boldness and shamelessness I never saw equalled during some years of police life and detective duty in the worst parts of London They live like pigs, great boys and girls, mothers and fathers, all sleeping in one room, in many instances." ("Child. After the exchange we have still the same total value of £90. INTENSITY OF LABOUR VARIABLE Increased intensity of labour means increased expenditure of labour in a given time. The Royal Commission appointed in 1867 to inquire into the employment in agriculture of children, young persons, and women, has published some very important reports. d. of linen, 20 yds. The less business there is, the more profit has to be made on the busi- ness done. Suppose that in spinning cotton, the waste for every 115 lbs. . The value of the additional capital, therefore, remaining the same or even diminishing, accelerated accumulation still takes place. Placed thus, she becomes a mere slave, tossed about with the variations of society. The mode in which manufacture arises, its growth out of hand- icrafts, is therefore two-fold. "Die Philosophie des Aristoteles," Vol. 1 8 adults Jowett Street, No. 56 . 5.) Although Corbet does not see that M — M, the exchange of money for money, is the characteristic form of cir- culation, not only of merchants' capital but of all capital, yet at least he acknowledges that this form is common to gambling and to one species of trade, viz., speculation: but then comes MacCulloch and makes out, that to buy in order to sell, is to speculate, and thus the difference between Specu- lation and Trade vanishes. The ownership of past unpaid labour is thenceforth the sole condition for the appropriation of living un- paid labour on a constantly increasing scale. The commodity linen manifests its quality of having a value by the fact that the coat, without having assumed a value-form different from its bodily form, is equated to the linen. The assignats Committee, in its report of April, 1854, gives him a severe snubbing Whether he also received the traditional drub- bing with bamboos is not stated. We are reminded of ancint Rome. ("Revolu- tions de Paris," Paris, 1791, t. 2 And this was one of the best Appalling tragedies," &c, a whole list of fresh railway catastrophes. destroyed 36 villages to create the New Forest.... 190, 381,5 37 lbs. They were an absurd anomaly, since the capitalist regulated his factory by his private legislation, and could by the poor-rates make up the wage of the agricultural labourer to the indispensable mini- mum. — We find ourselves once more in a period of serious change in the relative values of gold and silver. The owners of commodities came therefore into contact as the respective representatives of what were already equivalents. Only the working-time which is embodied in a quantum of commodities determined beforehand and experimental- ly fixed, counts as socially necessary working-time, and is paid as such. Such conditions, together with the prosperity of the towns so characteristic of the 15th century, allowed of that wealth of the people which Chancellor Fortescue so eloquently paints in his "Laudes legum Angliae"; but it excluded the possibility of capitalistic wealth. The only thing that interests us is the secret discov- ered in the new world by the Political Economy of the old world, and proclaimed on the house-tops: that the capitalist mode of production and accumulation, and therefore capitalist private property, have for their fundamental condition the annihilation of self-earned private property; in other words, the expropriation of the labourer. THE WORKING-DAY 275 I must beg leave to differ in sentiment from those great politicians, who contend for the perpetual slavery of the work- ing people of this kingdom; they forget the vulgar adage, all work and no play. c, p. . So long, during the 15th century, as the independent peasant and the farm-labour- er working for himself as well as for wages, enriched themselves by their own labour, the circumstances of the farmer, and his GENESIS OF THE CAPITALIST FARMER 743 field of production, were equally mediocre. Up to a certain point, the increased wear and tear of labour-power, inseparable from a lengthened working-day, may be compensated by higher wages. 1 Classical economy grasped this fact so thoroughly that Adam Smith, Ricardo, &c, as mentioned earlier, inaccurately identi- fied accumulation with the consumption, by the productive labourers, of all the capitalised part of the surplus-product, or with its transformation into additional wage-labourers. .1.6 From the movement of population and the agricultural prod- uce of Ireland, we pass to the movement in the purse of its land- lords, larger farmers, and industrial capitalists. 179.) This view, of course, does not prevent the same Mac- Culloch and others of his kidney, when in theoretical difficulties, such, for example, as the question of over-production, from transforming the same capitalist into a moral citizen, whose sole concern is for use-values, and who even develops an insatiable hunger for boots, hats, eggs, calico, and other extremely familiar sorts of use-values. . But the "ruthless" Factory Inspector Leonard Horner was again to the fore. Ine ratio „, . This ma- jority forms an element of the floating surplus-population, growing with the extension of those branches of industry. But the area of the triangle itself is expressed by something totally different from its visible figure, namely, by half the product of the base into the altitude. per yard to Id., leaving the earnings of the men exactly the same as before for the same labour. the common measure of buying and selling, every body who hath anything to sell, and cannot procure chapmen for it, is pres- ently apt to think, that want of money in the kingdom, or country, is the cause why his goods do not go off; and so, want of money is the common cry; which is a great mistake... c, p. c, ch. Eden, 1. 11. Value exists only in articles of utility, in objects: we leave out of consideration its purely symbolical representation by tokens. One portion serves as fresh means of production and remains social. These laws were then found, and really became, unnecessary and burdensome." (I. Her technical means for saving labour are colossal. The Bank Charter Act of 1844." Lond. 3 The labourer is the owner of his labour-power until he has done bargaining for its sale with the capitalist; and he can sell no more than what he has — i.e., his individual, isolated labour-power. Think- ing it was a mistake, he applied to the time-keeper, ... The comparison of the greed for surplus-labour in the Da- nubian Principalities with the same greed in English factories has a special interest, because surplus-labour in the corvee has an independent and palpable form. Each detail machine supplies raw material to the machine next in order; and since they are all working at the same time, the product is always going through the various stages of its fabrication, and is also constantly in a state of transition, from one phase to another. the produce being greater when their joint labours are employed on one farm, there will be a surplus for manufactures, and by this means manu- factures, one of the mines of the nation, will increase, in propor- tion to the quantity of corn produced." 1 The stoical peace of mind with which the political economist regards the most shameless violation of the "sacred rights of property" and the grossest acts of violence to persons, as soon as they are necessary to lay the foundations of the capitalistic mode of production, is shown by Sir F. . The agricultural labourers were to hire themselves out by the year, the town ones u in open market." It was forbidden, under pain of imprisonment, to pay higher wages than those fixed by the statute, but the taking of higher wages was more severely punished than the giving them. Com- pare, e.g. j the English factory legislation of our time with the 1 "But though the health of a population is so important a fact of the national capital, we are afraid it must be said that the class of employers of labour have not been the most forward to guard and cherish this treasure The consideration of the health of theoperatives was forced upon themill-own- ers." (Times, November 5th, 1861.) "The men of the West Riding became the clothiers of mankind ... These reserves serve as con- duits for the supply or withdrawal of money to or from the circu- lation, which in this way never overflows its banks. As simple reproduction constantly reproduces the capital-relation itself, i.e., the relation of capitalists on the one hand, and wage- workers on the other, so reproduction on a progressive scale, i.e., accumu- lation, reproduces the capital-relation on a progressive scale, more capitalists or larger capitalists at this pole, more wage- workers at that. When com- paring the mode of production of isolated peasants and artisans with production by slave-labour, the political economist counts this labour of superintendence among the faux frais of production. This ebbing and flowing of money supplies and accommodates itself, without any aid of Politicians.... . H. This act produces no increase of exchange-value either for the one or the other; for each of them already possessed, before 1 "L'echange est une transaction admirable dans laquelle les deux contractants gagnent— toujours (!)" (Destutt de Tracy: "Traite de la Vo- lonte et de ses effets." Paris, 1826, p. 534 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION There is a third formula which I have occasionally already anticipated; it is Surplus-value _ Surplus-la bour _ Unpaid labour ' Value of labour-power - Necessary labour - Paid labour After the investigations we have given above, it is no longer possible to be misled, by the formula p^id labour^ ' into conclud ~ ing, that the capitalist pays for labour and not for labour-power. In the meantime the pressure from without grew more threatening. But the chief sources of their supply are Germany, France, Russia, Italy, Egypt, Turkey, Bel- gium, and Holland. But without the leave, and behind the back, of our weaver, the old-fashioned mode of weaving undergoes a change. 21.) 8 "There is also" (when the same number of men are employed by one farmer on 300 acres, instead of by ten farmers with 30 acres a piece) "an ad- vantage in the proportion of servants, which will not so easily be under- stood but by practical men; for it is natural to say, as 1 is to 4, so are 3 to 12: but this will not hold good in practice; for in harvest time and many other operations which require that kind of despatch by the throwing many hands together, the work is better and more expeditiously done: f. Thereupon the commodity, under its aspect of a useful object, falls out of circulation into consump- tion. "Lectures on Polit. (Ch. xv., sect. I. The diminution began with the famine year, 1846, so that Ireland, in less than twenty 5 years, lost more than nrths of its people. of Fact., 31st October, 1865," pp. c, p. the rate of profits will generally be raised ... The men stealers were trained for this purpose. The instrument of labour strikes down the labourer. Complaints were at length made to the Nuisances Removal Committee by a medical gentleman who had occasion to visit these huts, and he spoke of their condition as dwellings in the most severe terms, and he expressed his fears that some very serious consequences might ensue, unless some sanitary measures were adopted. Categories 4,5, 6, of over 15 and not over 100 acres, are, as was known long since in England, too small for capitalistic cultivation of corn, and for sheep-breeding are almost vanishing quantities. When this periodicity is once consolidated, even Political Economy then sees that the production of a rela- tive surplus-population — i.e., surplus with regard to the aver- age needs of the self-expansion of capital— is a necessary con- dition of modern industry. 280. The tailor, the locksmith, and the oth- er artificers, being now exclusively occupied in carriage-making, each gradually loses, through want of practice, the ability to carry on, to its full extent, his old handicraft. Hence their independent value-form also, in these cases, confronts them under the shape of universal money. prove that production could never be enlarged, for it requires as an indispensable con- dition to such an enlargement that food, raw materials, and tools should be previously augmented; which is in fact maintaining that no increase of production can take place without a previous increase, or, in other words, that an increase is impossible." (S. must .... 16. 78, n. 8.) 1 Cf. Diodorus Siculus. They are now all "set free," and every new bit of capital looking out for employment can dispose of them. That he may live only twice as well as an ordinary labourer, and besides turn half of the surplus-value produced into capital, he would have to raise, with the number of labourers, the minimum of the capital advanced 8 times. . By the 'machinery' Mr. Potter means the human machinery, for he goes on to protest that he does not mean to use them as an absolute property. A machine that is undergoing repair, no longer plays the part of an instrument, but that of a subject of labour. 2 He (Busiris) divided them all into special castes ... 14.) THE WORKING-DAY 293 One set of masters, this time as before, secured to itself special seigneurial rights over the children of the proletariat. London, 1864, pp. 1 A great part of them cannot read, and they are, as a rule, utter savages and very extraordinary creatures. 9, 14 passim. . 518 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION the difference (?) to his employer and receiving it back with in- terest, &C." 1 In reality, the labourer advances his labour gratui- tously to the capitalist during, say one week, in order to receive the market-price at the end of the week, &c, and it is this which, according to Mill, transforms him into a capitalist. Among these 8 millions are: PERSONS, Agricultural labourers (including shep- herds, farm servants, and maidservants living in the houses of farmers), . This condensation of a greater mass of labour into a given period thence- forward counts for what it really is, a greater quantity of labour. And lastly, it serves as the universally recognised embodiment of social wealth, whenever the question is not of buying or paying, but of transferring wealth from one country to another, and whenever this transference in the form of commodities is rendered impossible, either by special conjunc- tures in the markets, or by the purpose itself that is intended. 2 1 "On doit encore remarquer que cette division partielle de travail peut se faire quand meme les ouvriers sont occupes d'une meme besogne. Here the factory system proper. By that means alone can the value of la- bour-power be made to sink, and the portion of the working-day necessary for the reproduction of that value, be shortened. In the second phase, C— M, or the sale, the commodity is changed back again into money. c, p. (n. As a matter of history, capital, as opposed to landed property, invariably takes the form at first of money; it appears as moneyed wealth, as the capital of the merchant and of the usurer. But viewed as a value-creating process, the same labour-process presents itself under its quanti- tative aspect alone. x The general rate of surplus-value is, there- fore, ultimately affected by the whole process, only when the in- crease in the productiveness of labour, has seized upon those branches of production that are connected with, and has cheapened those commodities that form part of, the necessary means of subsist- ence, and are therefore elements of the value of labour-power. This external relation between the finished product, and its various and diverse elements makes it, as well in this case as in the case of all similar finished articles, a matter of chance whether the detail labourers are brought together in one workshop or not. During one the "labourer produces a value that is only equal to the value of his labour-power: he produces its equivalent. At that hour he 'makes the dough,' —a laborious process, which lasts from half an hour to three quarters of an hour, according to the size of the batch or the labour bestowed upon it. It becomes the special social function of that commodity, and consequently its social monop- oly, to play within the world of commodities the part of the uni- versal equivalent. The results of the admirable work of Dr. Julian Hunter are to be found in the seventh (1865) and eighth (1866) reports on "Public Health." To the agricultural labourers, I shall come later. According to them, wages rise in consequence of accumulation of capital. G. The continual oscillations in prices, their rising and falling, compensate each other, and reduce themselves to an average price, which is their hidden regulator. Sawyers: 1851, 30,552: 1861,31,647— a small rise in consequence of the increase of sawing-machines. In India they employ 1 According to the annual report (1863) of the Essen chamber of com- merce, there was produced in 1862, at the cast-steel works of Krupp, with its 161 furnaces, thirty-two steam-engines (in the year 1800 this was about the number of all the steam-engines working in Manchester), and fourteen steam-hammers (representing in all 1,236 horse-power), forty-nine forges, 203 tool-machines, and about 2,400 workmen— thirteen million pounds of cast steel. See "Child. Finally, the use-value supplied by the labour- er to the capitalist is not, in fact, his labour-power, but its func- tion, some definite useful labour, the work of tailoring, shoemak- ing, spinning, &c. 124, p. The price of the working-hour thus found serves as the unit measure for the price of labour. 756 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION thieving system formed one of the secret bases of the capital- wealth of Holland to whom Venice in her decadence lent large sums of money. But then, he has the modern wage-labourer in his eye. that commodities are the sole agents of production ... On the oth- er hand, the labourer, on quitting the process, is what he was on entering it, a source of wealth, but devoid of all means of making that wealth his own. Hence its movement, as the medium of circulation, is, in fact, merely the movement of commodities while changing their form. "The progress of social wealth," says Storch, "begets this useful class of society . The circumstances may or may not be ripe for such a separation. I., p. many hundreds of them ... The reader knows that during the last 20 years, the flax industry has very much extended, and that, with that extension, the number of scutching mills in Ireland has increased. . In such cases, a week's expe- rience is enough to determine the proportion between the num- bers of the hands necessary for the various functions. xlvii. Were it true that the proportion between these two sorts of capital is the same at all times, and in all circumstances, then, indeed, it follows that the number of labourers employed is in proportion to the wealth of the state. is the great aim of some enterprising wholesale merchants. 1 7 ^ „ Back Pratt Street, used as a brazier's shop . . The latter stuck on to pure monetary relations the labels supplied by feudal law. tal y wage deduc- 1 Rent. Wherever the sewing-machine lo- cates itself in narrow and already over-crowded workrooms, it adds to the unwholesome influences. . Thus "tout est pour le mieux dans le meilleur des mondes possi- bles." By turning his money into commodities that serve as the material elements of a new product, and as factors in the labour- process, by incorporating living labour with their dead sub- stance, the capitalist at the same time converts value, i.e., past r materialised, and dead labour into capital, into value big with value, a live monster that is fruitful and multiplies. Persons of independent fortune . He pays them the value of 100 independent labour-powers, but he does not pay for the combined labour-power of the hundred. It never adds more value than it loses, on an average, by wear and tear. 2. Personal dependence here characterises the social relations of production just as much as it does the other spheres of life organised on the basis of that production. As soon as a machine executes, without man's help, all the movements requisite to elab- orate the raw material, needing only attendance frcm him, we have an automatic system of machinery, and one that is suscep- tible of constant improvement in its details. worked from 6 a. Therefore, in the value-relation of commodity A to commodity B, of the linen to the coat, not only is the latter, as value in gen- eral, made the equal in quality of the linen, but a definite quantity of coat (1 coat) is made the equivalent of a definite quantity (20 yards) of linen. about 1739 or 1740. j - the denominator increases, the numer- working-day ' ator increases yet more rapidly. But it has not the least idea, that when the difference between various kinds of labour is treated as purely quantitative, their qualitative unity or equality, and therefore their reduction to abstract human labour, is implied. Our friend, up to this time so purse- proud, suddenly assumes the modest demeanour of his own work- 1 "Extol thyself, put on finery and adorn thyself ... Reaction of the Factory System on Manufacture and Domestic Industries Along with the development of the factory system and of the revolution in agriculture that accompanies it, production in all the other branches of industry not only extends, but al- ters its character. Of his prayers and the like we take no account, since they are a source of pleasure to him, and he looks upon them as so much recreation. Leach deposes: "Last winter six out of nineteen girls were away from ill-health at one time from over-work. The rights of the children had to be proclaimed. m. 18,364 . Smith, "is larger than the average quantity indicates, since he eats a larger share .... Auteurs Glassiques.* The period of Modern Mechanical Industry has, of course, very much enlarged his catalogue of labour's diseases. Accumulate, accumulate! That is Moses and the prophets! "Industry furnishes the material which saving accumulates." 2 Therefore, save, save, i.e., reconvert the greatest possible portion of surplus-value, or surplus-product into capital! Accumulation for accumulation's sake, production for production's sake: by this formula classical economy expressed the historical mission of the bourgeoisie, and did not for a single instant deceive itself over the birth-throes of wealth. Finally, in what is called manufacturing industry, every additional expenditure of labour pre-supposes a corresponding additional expenditure of raw materials, but not necessarily of instruments of labour. But when it comes to regulating the so-called "home-labour," 1 it is immedi- ately viewed as a direct attack on the patria potestas, on parental authority. 135.) THE GENERAL LAW OP CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 653 the industrial classes .... To resume, then: In the use-value of each commodity there is contained useful labour, i.e., productive activity of a definite kind and exercised with a definite aim. * In 1795 the deficit was less than -j the wage, in 1814, more than half. This splitting-up of the total social capital into many indi- vidual capitals or the repulsion of its fractions one from another, is counteracted by their attraction. Since this unit is determined by the ratio daily value of labour-power .. You may smile over Babylon in ruins and congrat- ulate the hardened Pharaoh on his overthrow in the Red Sea." (1. of yarn, then t^ ths of this value, or the 24s. The science of others is as much annexed by capital as the labour of others. During this time the work goes on fast and furious without intermission from 6 a. First, the price of the commodities varies inversely as the value of the money, and then the quantity of the medium of circulation varies directly as the price of the commodities, Exactly the same thing would happen 118 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION if, for instance, instead of the value of gold falling, gold were re- placed by silver as the measure of value, or if, instead of the value of silver rising, gold were to thrust silver out from being the measure of value. Again, a combination of labour occurs whenever a build- ing, for instance, is taken in hand on different sides simultaneously; although here also the co-operating masons are doing the same, or the same kind of work. But while in the subsequent ten years the population in the villages and the country increased half a million, the population in the 580 towns increased by a mil- lion and a half (1,554,067). That old-fashioned industry has now been converted into an outside department of the factory, the manufactory, or the warehouse. The ellipse is a form of motion which, while allowing this contradiction to go on, at the same time reconciles it. A sum, many hundred times as great, of old values swells the value of his product, in which those re-appear in a new, useful form, and can thus func- tion anew as capital. "Oo y^P MMAei to 7cpaTT6jievov Ttjv Too irpdixovTo; a^oX-gv 7Upi|i«veiv, dXX' avaifXT) tov 7tpattovra tq> TrpaxTOiicvw iTraxoXoo&eiv jxyj h Tzapipyoo jitpet. 1 Long before the period of Modern Industry, co-operation and the concentration of the instruments of labour in the hands of a few, gave rise, in numerous countries where these methods were applied in agriculture, to great, sudden and forcible revolutions in the modes of production, and conse- quentially, in the conditions of existence, and the means of employ- ment of the rural populations. For the present, however, we have to consider the nature of value independently of this, its form. The Workshops' Regulation Act, wretched in all its details, remained a dead letter in the hands of the municipal and local authorities who were charged with its execution. In free coun- tries, they mostly frequent the assemblies of the people.... They are categories for the phenomenal forms of essential relations. labour-power its full value.) 1 The "Cyclops Steel and Iron Works," of Messrs. For me the purchase from A and the sale to B are part of a series. In paper money it stands out plainly. The manufacturing period simplifies, improves, and multiplies the implements of labour, by adapting them to the exclusively special functions of each detail labourer. c. "They try, of course, to remain as near as possible to their workshops. But the huge masses of iron that had now to be forged, to be welded, to be cut, to be bored, and to be shaped, demanded, on their part, cyclopean machines, for the construction of which the methods of the manufacturing period were utterly inadequate. c, p. Although in the district of Stoke, only 36.6% and in Wolstanton only 30.4% of the adult male popu- lation above 20 are employed in the potteries, among the men of that age in the first district more than half, in the second, 2 nearly -=- of the whole deaths are the result of pulmonary diseases o among the potters. Coats and linen, however, are not merely values, but values of definite magnitude, and according to our assumption, the coat is worth twice as much as the ten yards of linen. on Railways," Lond., 1867, Minutes of Evidence, n. "The increase of labourers is general- ly greatest, since 1851, in such branches of industry in which machinery has not up to the present been employed with success." (Census of England and Wales for 1861. In our example this ratio is ^, which gives an increase of 100%. 2 Circula- tion, or the exchange of commodities, begets no value. 11.) 2 That Philistine paper, the Spectator, states that after the introduc- tion of a sort of partnership between capitalist and workmen in the "Wire- work Company of Manchester," "the first result was a sudden decrease in waste, the men not seeing why they should waste their own property any more than any other master's, and waste is, perhaps, next to bad debts, the greatest source of manufacturing loss." The same paper finds that the main defect in the Rochdale co-operative experiments is this: "They showed that associa- tions of workmen could manage shops, mills, and almost all forms of indus- try with success, and they immediately improved the condition of the men but then they did not leave a clear place for masters." Quelle horreur! 332 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION capitalist is in substance two-fold by reason of the two-fold nature of the process of production itself,— which, on the one hand, is a social process for producing use-values, on the other, a process for creating surplus-value — in form that control is despotic. of Fact, lor the hall-year, ending 30th April, 1855, pp. 1852.-765,630,543 lbs. . . Hence, when in 1844 the re- duction of the working-day to less than twelve hours was being de- bated, the masters almost unanimously declared "that their over- lookers in the different rooms took good care that the hands lost no time," that "the extent of vigilance and attention on the part of the workmen was hardly capable of being increased," and, there- fore, that the speed of the machinery and other conditions remain- ing unaltered, "to expect in a well-managed factory any impor- tant result from increased attention of the workmen was an absurdity." 2 This assertion was contradicted by experiments. 14, 15.) 512 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION the flesh of another. It cannot be otherwise in a mode of production in which the labourer exists to satisfy the needs of self-expansion of existing values, instead of, on the contrary, ma- terial wealth existing to satisfy the needs of development on the part of the labourer. During this period of 45 years the English man- ufacturers had a monopoly of machinery and of the markets of the world. The oppression of the agricultural population under all these petty tyrants will be understood Monteil says that there were once in France 160,000 judges, where to-day, 4,000 tribunals, including justices of the peace, suffice. . xxxi. . 6d. And since we break on the wheel, and behead highwaymen, murderers and housebreakers, how much more ought we to break on the wheel and kill,... Of these only 4,063 were, according to the Parliamentary Return of the 11th February, 1862, working under the Factory Acts. operating pretty much as they did when the Norman Con- queror... The bourgeois economist whose narrow mind is unable to separate the form of appearance from the thing that appears, shuts his eyes to the fact, that it is but here and there on the face of the earth, that even now-a-days the labour-fund crops up in the form of capital. The labourer consumes in a two-fold way. a 1 c, p 45. The reproduction of a mass of labour-power, which must incessantly re-incorporate itself with capital for that capital's self-expansion; which cannot get free from capital, and 614 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION whose enslavement to capital is only concealed by the variety of individual capitalists to whom it sells itself, this reproduction of labour-power forms, in fact, an essential of the reproduction of capital itself. "Bristol, where the blankest poverty and domestic misery abound in the wealthiest town of Europe." 2 (c.) The Nomad Population We turn now to a class of people whose origin is agricultural, but whose occupation is in great part industrial. 15 8 1. Hence, when money enters on its functions as a measure of value, when it expresses prices, its value is already determined. They too are now severed from their connexion with the more pregnant moments of activity, and ossified into exclusive functions of spe- cially appointed labourers. But that one may be a commodity of any kind, coat, iron, corn, or anything else. Finally, although the depopu- lation has not such destructive consequences as would result in a country with fully developed capitalistic production, it does not go on without constant reaction upon the home-market. Malthus, hugely astonished at his success, gave himself to stuffing into his book materials superficially compiled, and adding to it new matter, not discovered but annexed by him. Arledge, senior physician of the North Staffordshire Infirmary, says: "The potters as a class, both men and women, represent a degenerated population, both physically and morally. Thorold Rogers. 4, 5. 234, 241, 251, 254, 274, 275, 554, 276, 293.) "But do you think it would be possible for Government to maintain such an army of inspectors as would be necessary to do all that you want them to do, without information from the men?" "No, I should think it would be next to impossible." . of yarn; for in i^ths or 16 lbs. 1 The powerful and ever-increasing assistance given by past labour to the living labour-process under the form of means of production is, therefore, attributed to that form of past labour in which it is alienated, as unpaid labour, from the worker himself, i.e., to its capitalistic form. Moreover, it is obvious that the fact of the collective working group being composed of individ- uals of both sexes and all ages, must necessarily, under suitable conditions, become a source of humane development; although in its spontaneously developed, brutal, capitalistic form, where the labourer exists for the process of production, and not the process of production for the labourer, that fact is a pestiferous source of corruption and slavery. The total capital of Ireland outside agriculture, employed in industry and trade, accumulated during the last two decades slowly, and with great and constantly recurring fluctuations; so much the more rapidly did the concentration of its individual constituents develop. "True wealth (6 dXri&tvoi; nkou'ot;) consists of such values in use; for the quantity of possessions of this kind, capable of making life pleas- ant, is not unlimited. We proceed upon the assumption that spinning is simple, unskilled labour, the average labour of a given state of society. of Factories," April 30th, 1863, p. Ought not Mr. Carey to con- sider further whether those "State expenses" are not the "natural" fruits of capitalistic development? As to man, his bodily height lessens if his due growth is interfered with, either by phys- ical or social conditions. See the evidence collected by Leonard Horner himself, Nos. V. During the very first storms of the revolution, the French bourgeoisie dared to take away from the workers the right of association but just acquired. All that these things now tell us is, that human labour-power has been expended in their production, that human labour is embodied in them. The hours of work for these hands are unlimited. 167, 168.) 3 Auguste Comte and his school might therefore, have shown that feu- dal lords are an eternal necessity in the same way that they have done in the case of the lords of capital. II., p. of Fact, for 31st. x Hence a flow of people into the cotton-weaving trade, till at length the 800,000 weavers, called into existence by the Jenny, the throstle and the mule, were overwhelmed by the power-loom. Leaving the workhouse, I took a walk through the streets, mostly of little one-storey houses, that abound in the neigh- bourhood of Poplar. The rate of surplus-value and the length of the working-day depended on the magnitude of this pro- longation. What are set free are not only the labourers immediately turned out by the machines, but also their future substitutes in the rising genera- tion, and the additional contingent, that with the usual exten- sion of trade on the old basis would be regularly absorbed. A memo- THE WORKING-DAY 265 restrainable passion, its were-wolf hunger for surplus-labour, capital oversteps not only the moral, but even the merely physical maximum bounds of the working-day. The secret of the flour- ishing state of industry in Spain and Sicily under the dominion of the Arabs lay in their irrigation works. 1 When the present Duchess of Sutherland entertained Mrs. London, 1863, p. He takes 5 minutes from the beginning and from the end of the half hour nominally allowed for breakfast, and 10 minutes at the beginning and end of the hour nominally allowed for dinner. But the past labour that is embodied in the labour-power, and the liv- ing labour that it can call into action; the daily cost of maintain- ing it, and its daily expenditure in work, are two totally differ- ent things. SECTION 2.— THE GREED FOR SURPLUS-LABOUR. In that town a MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 425 We shall here merely allude to the material conditions under which factory labour is carried on. 206.) "If each man's labour were but enough to produce his own food, there could be no property." (Ravenstone, 1. In the controversies on this subject the chief fact has generally been overlooked, viz., the differentia specifica of capitalistic production. . 77, 69. it will soon appear that in some manour seventeene, eighteene, or twentie houses are shrunk . 4 The trades proposed to be brought under the Act were the following: Lace-making, stocking-weaving, straw-plaiting, the manufacture of wear- ing apparel with its numerous sub-divisions, artificial flower-making, shoe- making, hat-making, glove-making, tailoring, all metal works, from blast furnaces down to needleworks, &c, paper-mills, glass-works, tobacco fac- tories, india-rubber works, braid-making (for weaving), hand-carpet-mak- ing, umbrella and parasol making, the manufacture of spindles and spools, letter-press printing, book-binding, manufacture of stationery (including paper bags, cards, coloured paper, &c), rope-making, manufacture of jet ornaments, brick-making, silk manufacture by hand, Coventry weaving, salt works, tallow chandlers, cement works, sugar refineries, biscuit -making, various industries connected with timber, and other mixed trades. MANUFACTURER AND BOYARD Capital has not invented surplus-labour. It is other- wise with the corvee. 10. It is self-evident, that in proportion as the use of machinery spreads, and the experience of a special class of workmen habitu- ated to machinery accumulates, the rapidity and intensity of labour increase as a natural consequence. . c, p. 4 1 In 1790, there were in the English West Indies ten slaves for one free man, in the French fourteen forone, in the Dutch twenty-three for one. 36. Not less characteristic of the development of French society, generally, the fact, that Louis Philippe's law stood solitary among the all-em- icing mass of French laws, till the Revolution of 1848. ha ypr,|i2Tcov S<.a2oV?]<;). Now in 1862 the British juryman had in a law-suit to decide whether soot, with which, unknown to the buyer, 90% of dust and sand are mixed, is genuine soot in the commercial sense or adulterated soot in the legal sense. Political Economy since the time of Adam Smith has confusedly mixed up the essential distinctions involved in these categories, with the merv formal differences, arising out of the process of circulation, of fixed and circulating capital. We have shown that surplus-value cannot be created by cir- culation, and, therefore, that in its formation, something must take place in the background, which is not apparent in the circulation itself. It produces, there- lore, a new class of small villagers who, while following the cultivation of the soil as an accessary calling, find their chief occu- pation in industrial labour, the products of which they sell to the manufacturers directly, or through the medium of merchants. 232 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION business employs little more than 6% of boys under 18, and less than 1% under 13. The change in the form of that circulation stamps buyer and seller with this new die. 66, n. 2,369,837 lbs. The zero of their cost is theiefore a limit in a mathematical sense, always beyond reach, although we can always approximate more and more nearly to it. He remembered quite clearly that for the Messrs. 4 This gradually brings on a reaction like that already described in time-wages, without reckoning that the pro- longation of the working-day, even if the piece-wage remains con- stant, includes of necessity a fall in the price of the labour. Adam Smith has made it the fashion, to represent accumulation as nothing more than consumption of surplus-products by productive labourers, which amounts to saying, that the capitalising of surplus-value consists in merely turning surplus-value into labour-power. 31st Oct., 1865," p. Comm., II. He adds maliciously: "We were ready enough to interfere for the employer, can nothing now be done for the employed?" LEGISLATION AGAINST THE EXPROPRIATED 739 clearly in the fact, that indeed a maximum of wages is dictated by the State, but on no account a minimum. With the four shillings and sixpence which he produces in nine hours, he commands one-tenth less of the nec- essaries of life than before, and consequently the proper reproduc- tion of his labour-power is crippled. Thus the desire for social changes, and the class antagonisms are brought to the same level in the country as in the towns. 1, p. Sanderson answers in the name of all the San- dersons: "It is true that there is this loss from machinery ly- ing idle in those manufactories in which work only goes on by day. "So far, the semi-mercantilist reaction of Ganilh is not altogether without foundation." (Wilhelm Roscher: "Die Grundlagen der Nationaloekonomie," 3rd Edn., 1858, pp. 4 1. If the rate of wages is such as to THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION gig more or less favourable to the labourer, include therefore the ne- cessity of its constant re-selling, and the constantly extended reproduction of all wealth in the shape of capital. The simple fact, by no means a new one, that machinery cuts off the workmen from their means of subsist- ence is, therefore, in economic parlance tantamount to this, that machinery liberates means of subsistence for the workman, or converts those means into capital for his employment. Free competition brings out the inherent laws of capitalist production, in the shape of external coercive laws having power over every individual capitalist. 6, p. 101.) The same report then gives some examples of the morality and virtue of these same pure-minded manufacturers, of the tricks, the artifices, the cajoling, the threats, and the falsifications, they made use of, in order, first, to compel a few defenceless workmen to sign petitions of such a kind, and then to impose them upon Parliament as the petitions of a whole branch of industry, or a whole country. hunt down, curse and behead all usurers." (Martin Luther, 1. The cry was so urgent that Mr. H. It, on the one hand, the mere formal subjection of labour to capital suffices for the production of absolute surplus-value, if, e.g., it is sufficient that handicraftsmen who previously worked on their own account, or as apprentices of a master, should become wage-labourers under the direct control of a capitalist; so, on the other hand, we have seen, how the methods of producing relative surplus-value, are, at the same time, methods of producing abso- lute surplus-value. c, Vol. Smith: "Wealth of Nations," Bk. v., ch. London, 1773, pp. In 1851, 252 persons inhabited 61 houses, but in 1861, 262 per- sons were squeezed into 49 houses. non-exchange ... S. Consequently, al- though, like all other commodity-producing labour, it is the labour of private individuals, yet, at the same time, it ranks as labour directly social in its character. does not exist only in theory. In the primitive Indian community there is social division of labour, without production of commodities. 2 Ibidem. There they are to be seen in the unwholesome brass-foundries, button facto- ries, enamelling, galvanising, and lackering works. xi.. If the capital further grows to £2,000, 400 men will be em- ployed, or one-third more than under the old system. (The various Statutes were passed between 1836 and 1858.) "Labour performed during a period of 10 hours on any day in all cotton, woollen, silk, paper, glass, and flax factories, or in manufactories of iron and brass, shall be considered a legal day's labour. 81-82.) 2 "Wages as well as profits are to be considered, each of them, as really a portion of the finished product." (Ramsay, 1. In the background lurked the intention of screwing up, during prosperous years, the working-day of adult males to 15 hours by the aid of the children. It was allowed to use these notes for discounting bills, making advances on commodities, and for buying the precious metals. . We see mighty coral reefs rising from the depths of the ocean into islands and firm land, yet each individual depositor is puny, weak, and contemptible. Jacob gives the following calculation for the year 1815. A deer-forest in place of a sheep-walk was a common change in the Highlands. In the discrete workshop (manufacture separee), on the contrary, no one will become rich, but many labourers will be comfortable; the saving and the industrious will be able to amass a little capi- tal, to put by a little for a birth of a child, for an illness, for them- selves or their belongings. But the fact that it is v alone that varies, and the conditions of that varia- tion, are obscured by the circumstance that in consequence of the increase in the variable component of the capital, there is also an increase in the sum total of the advanced capital. To the elementary relative value-form of a commodity, there corresponds the single equiv- alent form of one other commodity. they are then engaged all day long ... E.] VARIOUS FORMULAE FOR RATE OF SURPLUS-VALUE 533 the estimate of L. In the second case, it is not the increased rate either of the absolute, or of the proportional, increase in labour-power, or labouring population, reduce the master's gains below the average profit oi' capital, he will cease to employ them, or he will only employ them on condition of submission to a reduction of wages." (John Wade, 1. Lassalle: "Die Philosophie Herakleitos des Dunkeln." Berlin, 1858, Vol. If from the total population of 18,000,000 living at the time when he wrote, we deduct 1,000,000 for the "genteel population," and 1,500,000 for paupers, vagrants, criminals, prostitutes, &c, and 4,650,000 who compose the mid- dle-class, there remain the above mentioned 11,000,000. x Nevertheless the position of this detail labourer who, though he works at home, does so for a capitalist (manufacturer, etablisseur), is very differ- ent from that of the independent artificer, who works for his own customers. 126 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION latter thereby ceases any longer to be a real equivalent of the com- modities whose prices it realises. B or=v Com. Hence there is immanent in capital an inclination and constant tendency, to heighten the productiveness of labour, in order to cheapen commodities, and by such cheapening to cheapen the labourer himself. And this mode of payment tends in its turn to maintain the ancient form of production. Our natural intercourse as commodities proves it. But as soon as this diminu- tion touches the point at which the surplus-labour that nourishes capital is no longer supplied in normal quantity, a reaction sets in: a smaller part of revenue is capitalised, accumulation lags, and the movement of rise in wages receives a check. As to the cheapening of the means of subsistence, the official statistics, e.g., the accounts of the Lon- don Orphan Asylum, show an increase in price of 20% for the average of the three years 1860-1862, compared with 1851-1853. Personified capital, the capitalist takes care that the labourer does his work regularly and with the proper degree of intensity. If, then, the expansion of value is once aimed at, there is just the same inducement to augment the value of the £110 as that of the £100; for both are but limited expressions for exchange-value, and therefore both have the same vocation to approach, by quan- titative increase, as near as possible to absolute wealth. . Tre- menheere, also a member of the Commission of 1863 several times mentioned, was appointed Royal Commissioner of Inquiry. They had entered upon the contest for the repeal of the Corn Laws, and needed the workers to help them to victory. Tables showing the estimated average produce, &c, Dublin, 1866." These statistics are official, an! laid before Parliament annually. 2 "C'est, ajoutez-vous, grace a l'appropriation du sol et des capitaux que rhomme, qui n'a que ses bras, trouve de l'occupation, et se fait un revenu... The intermediate steps of the process vanish in the result and leave no trace behind. 15, MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 433 child can superintend it." 1 "On the automatic plan skilled la- bour gets progressively superseded". When he had finished what is called a day's work, he had been on duty 14 hours 50 minutes. m. When a person gets through all his property, by taking upon himself debts equal to the value of that property, it is clear that his property represents nothing but the sum total of his debts. But his labour is not represented both by the value of the commodity, and by a surplus over that value, not by a price of 10 that is also a price of 11, not by a value that is greater than itself. the difference in the wages of skilful and common labour is far less now than at any former pe- riod." 2 How little the increased intensity and extension of labour through piece-wages benefited the agricultural proletariat, the fol- lowing passage borrowed from a work on the side of the landlords and farmers shows: "By far the greater part of agricultural opera- French edition, Hume is not yet mentioned, whilst in the English, on the other hand, Petty hardly figures any longer. 240 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION Let us listen, for a moment, to the Factory Inspectors. Sturrock, superintendent of the machine department of the Great Northern Railway, says, with regard to the building of locomotives, &c: "Expensive English workmen are being less used every day. The moment was cleverly chosen. c, pp. This period terminated about the end of November, 1871. . 12-28 passim. The bedroom is a garret; the walls run together into the roof like a sugar-loaf, a dormer-win- dow opening in front. Hence, in this process which continually makes money pass from hand to hand, the mere symbolical existence of money suffices. Hence the relation between the values of two commodities supplies us with the simplest expression of the value of a single commodity. Mod- ern manufacture wherever it arises — I do not here allude to modern industry based on machinery— either finds the disjecta membra poetse ready to hand, and only waiting to be collected together, as is the case in the manufacture of clothes in large towns, or it can easily apply the principle of division, simply by ex- clusively assigning the various operations of a handicraft (such as book-binding) to particular men. In 1854 the Society of Arts appointed a Commission of Inquiry into industrial pathology. 3 3 families George Street, No. 128 . saw on her journey to the Crimea. 1 MacCulloch took out a patent for "wages of past labour," long before .Senior did for "wages of abstinence." CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO CAPITAL 609 SECTION 5.— THE SO-CALLED LABOUR-FUND It has been shown in the course of this inquiry that capital is not a fixed magnitude, but is a part of social wealth, elastic and constantly fluctuating with the division of fresh surplus-value into revenue and additional capital. In order to prevent these satellites from establishing themselves permanently in the place of gold, positive enactments determine the extent to which they must be compul- sorily received as payment instead of gold. c, 57, p. "Legisla- tion is necessary for the prevention of death, in any form in which it can be prematurely inflicted, and certainly this (i.e., the factory method) must be viewed as a most cruel mode of inflicting it." That same "reformed" Parliament, which in its delicate con- sideration for the manufacturers, condemned children under 13, for years to come, to 72 hours of work per week in the Factory Hell, on the other hand, in the Emancipation Act, which also administered freedom drop by drop, forbade the planters, from the outset, to work any negro slave more than 45 hours a week. The man whose whole life is spent in performing a few simple operations . But it is on tjiis very basis that he sells his labour and that his labour is wage-labour. . of linen = 1 coat, without altering its general character, and converting it from the expanded form of value into the general form of value. Tod' IxStoiaxet xai rcapaMaaaei cppsvcn; XpTpxdq Ttpo? Age 45-55. 462 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION motion, by means, of invisible threads, another army; that of the workers in the domestic industries, who dwell in the large towns and are also scattered over the face of the country. is the daily value of one labour-power or the value of the capital advanced in the buying of one labour- power. Many, many thousands of these little, hapless creatures were sent down into the north, being from the age of 7 to the age of 13 or 14 years old. It therefore pre-supposes a specific mode, the capitalist mode of production, a mode which, along with its methods, means, and conditions, arises and devel- ops itself spontaneously on the foundation afforded by the formal subjection of labour to capital. This shows that when placed in value-relation to the linen, the coat signifies more than when out of that relation, just as many a man strutting about in a gorgeous uniform counts for more than when in mufti. . According as the wooden hut contains 1, 2, or 3 holes, its inhabitant, navvy, or whatever he may be, has to pay 1, 3, or 4 shillings weekly. . 7, n. It is very convenient to be "liberal" at the expense of the middle ages. In silk factories, for instance, there were in 1856, spindles 1,093,799; in 1862, 1,388,544; in 1856, looms 9,260; in 1862, 10,709. It is true that if the weaver, after buying the Bible, sell more linen, money comes back into his hands. Hence all the circumstances that determine the mass of surplus-value, operate to determine the magnitude of the accumu- lation. The prin- ciple of utility was no discovery of Bentham. So soon, however, as products once become commodities in the external relations of a community, they also, by reaction, become so in its internal intercourse. Similarly the distinction between the exchange-value of labour-power, and the sum of the necessaries of life into which this value is converted, now re-appears as the distinction between nominal and real wages. The underselling masters generally sell their 1 1. 3 To get rid of the abuses of the "spurious relay system," the law established besides others the following important regula- tions: — "That the hours of work of children and young persons shall be reckoned from the time when any child or young per- son shall begin to work in the morning." So that if A, e.g., be- gins work at 8 in the morning, and B at 10, B's work-day must nevertheless end at the same hour as A's. The room was not bare of furniture, and there was a fire in it. [Added in the 4th German edition. ... c, v. The sole alteration con- sists in the subdivision and denomination. It represents now 3 hours of social labour instead of the 6 formerly necessary. totally laid waste, embracing within their area some of the most fertile lands of Scotland. The scene and language while this market is going on are quite disgraceful." 1 It has also occurred in England, that women have taken "children from the workhouse and let any one have them out for 2s. 1 As soon as this process of transformation has sufficiently de composed the old society from top to bottom, as soon as the la- bourers are turned into proletarians, their means of labour into capital, as soon as the capitalist mode of production stands on 1 "Nous sommes dans une condition tout-a-fait nouvelle de la so- ciete... Then again, the labour-power itself must be of average efficacy. Bullion, then, may be reckoned to be of higher value where the smaller weight will purchase the greater quantity of the product or manufacture of the countrey," &c. This occurs constantly under the every-day form of pre- payments. This rule also holds good in the case of the product that accrued to our capitalist, as the result of the labour- process carried on for him. Smith, L.L.D. On the Life, Death, and Phi- losophy of his Friend, David Hume. ii., p. In Manufacture it is the workmen who, with their manual implements, must, either singly or in groups, carry on each particular detail process. Instead, therefore, of proving that, when machinery frees the workman from his means of subsistence, it simultaneously converts those means into capital for his further employment, our apologists, with their cut-and-dried law of supply and demand, prove, on the contrary, that machinery throws workmen on the streets, not only in that branch of production in which it is in- troduced, but also in those branches in which it is not introduced. ce que Ton payait 24." (Le Trosne, 1. Spinning and weaving were, during the manufacturing period, split up into new species, and the implements were modified and improved; but the labour itself was in no way divided, and it retained its handicraft character. even to work for their own daily bread. 2 Ferrand's Speech in the House of Commons, 27th April, 1863. The flax looks exactly as before. With reference to the children in these colonies, Dr. Hun- ter says: "People are not now alive to tell us how children were brought up before this age of dense agglomerations of poor began, and he would be a rash prophet who should tell us what future behaviour is to be expected from the present growth of children, who, under circumstances probably never before paralleled in this country, are now completing- their education for future practice, as 'dangerous classes' by sitting up half the night with per- sons of every age, half naked, drunken, obscene, and quarrelsome." (1. The particular commodity, with whose bodily form the equiv- alent form is thus socially identified, now becomes the money- commodity, or serves as money. Hence, Manufacture begets, in every handicraft that it seizes upon, a class of so-called unskilled la- bourers, a class which handicraft industry strictly excluded. The constant generation of a relative surplus-pop- ulation keeps the law of supply and demand of labour, and there- fore keeps wages, in a rut that corresponds with the wants of capital. In fact this kind of so- phistry knows better than Protagoras how to make white black, and black white, and better than the Eleatics how to demon- strate ad oculos that everything is only appearance. 148. In the trade between the markets of the world, the value of commodities is expressed so as to be univer- sally recognised. England thereby acquired the right of supplying Spanish America until 1743 with 4,800 negroes yearly. 8 1. The primary or isolated relative form of value of one com- modity converts some other commodity into an isolated equivalent. and brings no profit to that country it's kept in, but as it is transported in trade, as well as imported." (John Bellers, "Essays," p. 319.) 1 "The more variety ot artists to every manufacture .. 72.) 442 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION except by capital, is to him an impossibility. The in- creasing size of the prime movers, of the transmitting mechanism, and of the machines proper, the greater complication, multifor- mity and regularity of the details of these machines, as they more and more departed from the model of those originally made by manual labour, and acquired a form, untrammelled except by the conditions under which they worked, 1 the perfecting of the auto- matic system, and the use, every day more unavoidable, of a more refractory material, such as iron instead of wood— the solution of all these problems, which sprang up by the force of circum- stances, everywhere met with a stumbling-block in the personal restrictions, which even the collective labourer of Manufacture could not break through, except to a limited extent. The modern hawkers of Free-trade, who must get rid of their article at any price, on the other hand, lay most stress on the quantitative aspect of the relative form of value. This increment or excess over the original value I call "surplus- value." The value originally advanced, therefore, not only re- mains intact while in circulation, but adds to itself a surplus- value or expands itself. Labour-power, however, becomes a reality only by its exercise; it sets itself in action only by working. "Since the restriction of the hours of work to ten, the factory occupiers maintain, although they have not yet practically gone the whole length, that suppos- ing the hours of work to be from 9 a. They broke out in open revolt not only against the Ten Hours' Act, but against the whole of the legislation that since 1833 had aimed at restricting in some measure the "free" exploita- tion of labour-power. The objection would be the increase in the cost of pro- duction Skilled hands and the heads in every depart- ment are difficult to get, but of lads we could get any number. Clearly 1 Among the ancient Germans the unit for measuring land was what could be harvested in a day, and was called Tagwerk, Tagwanne (jurnale, or terra jurnalis, or diornalis), Mannsmaad, &c (See G. The 12 masons, in their collective working- day of 144 hours, make much more progress with the building than one mason could make working for 12 days, or 144 hours. 1 "Half the girls of Ludford have been ruined by going out" (in gangs). History shows how the division of labour peculiar to manu- facture, strictly so called, acquires the best adapted form at first by experience, as it were behind the backs of the actors, and then, like the guild handicrafts, strives to hold fast that form when once found, and here and there succeeds in keeping it for centu- ries. . We know that the daily value of labour-power is calculated upon a certain length of the labourer's life, to which, again, cor- responds a certain length of working-day. In the second place, a change in the value of gold does not interfere with its functions as a measure of value. "And there is nothing wonderful in this, for as the other arts are brought to special perfection in the great towns, so the royal food is prepared in a special way. The value of the coat is equated to linen, that of the tea to iron. This modern so-called domes- tic industry has nothing, except the name, in common with the old-fashioned domestic industry, the existence of which pre-sup- poses independent urban handicrafts, independent peasant farm- ing, and above all, a dwelling-house for the labourer and his family. II., pp. 285.) "When you speak of sub-inspectors, do you mean men at a less salary, and of an inferior stamp to the present inspectors?" "I would not have them inferior, if you could get them otherwise." (n. . The latter can work only as Nature does, that is by changing the form of matter. Harrup was followed from the court by a crowd of people who hissed him. But I do not need to go further than to the window of the room in which I am writing, to see at al- most any time, treatment of cattle that would ensure the immediate dis- charge of the driver by almost any farmer owning them in the North." 1 The distinction between skilled and unskilled labour rests in part on pure illusion, or, to say the least, on distinctions that have long since ceased ot be real, and that survive only by virtue of a traditional convention; in 198 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION But on the other hand, in every process of creating value, the reduction of skilled labour to average social labour, e.g., one day of skilled to six days of unskilled labour, is unavoid- able. These conditions affect surplus-labour only as natural limits, i.e., by fixing the points at which labour for others can begin. This value is the surplus, of the total value of the prod- uct, over the portion of its value that is due to the means of pro- duction. "The French," he says, "laugh at our enthusiastic ideas of liber- ty." I. For instance, the value of a pair of boots depends, not only on the cobbler's labour, but also on the value of the leather, wax, thread, &c. According as we read this equation forwards or backwards, the parts played by the linen and the coat are different. It will be seen later 1 how the school of Ricardo has come to grief over this stumbling-block. The combination of these two phases constitutes the single movement whereby money is ex- changed for a commodity, and the same commodity is again exchanged for money; whereby a commodity is bought in order to be sold, or, neglecting the distinction in form between buying and selling, whereby a commodity is bought with money, and then money is bought with a commodity. It might, as Mr. Potter says, requiresome time to reproduce the workers, but, having machinists and capital- ists at hand, we could always find thrifty, hard, industrious men wherewith to improvise more master-manufacturers than we can ever want. The third, when luxury began, and the trade was pushed by sending out riders for orders into every market town in the Kingdom It is probable that few or no capi- tals of £3,000 to £4,000 acquired by trade existed here before 1690. If therefore production is called an exchange of labour and means of production against the product, it is clear as day that you obtain more exchange-value in proportion as the production yields more use-value. Workman says: No, he has already been punished for the breach. l The total quantity of money functioning during a given period as the circulating medium, is determined, on the one 1 "Money being ... 3 From the standpoint of these, capitalistic co-operation does not man- ifest itself as a particular historical form of co-operation, but co- operation itself appears to be a historical form peculiar to, and spe- cifically distinguishing, the capitalist process of production. Let us suppose that, as the result of experience, a labourer who works with the average amount of intensity and skill, who, therefore, gives in fact only the time so- cially necessary to the production of an article, supplies in 12 hours 24 pieces, either distinct products or measurable parts of a contin- uous whole. With- out strength to endure such disproportionate toil, without instruction to guide their future life, they have been thrown into a situation physically and morally polluted. In his nor- mal state of health, strength, and activity, and with the average degree of skill that he may possess, he must always give up the same portion of his rest, his freedom, and his happiness." ("Wealth of Nations," b. You must lay down a general rule? Instead of being consumed by him as material ele- ments of his productive activity, they consume him as the ferment necessary to their own life-process, and the life-process of capital consists only in its movement as value constantly expanding, con- stantly multiplying itself. W. 21.) 8 John Fielden, 1. If, therefore, a certain degree of accumulation of capital appears as a condition of the specifically capitalist mode of production, the latter causes conversely an accelerated accumulation of capi- tal. We may reduce these phenomena to two great classes: (1.) Change of wages with the changing length of the working-day. We get nothing (to eat) before we come to work. a day. Thus, Beccaria: "Ciascuno prova coll'esperienza, che applicando la mano e l'ingegno sempre alio stesso genere di opere e di produtte, egli piu facili, piu abbondanti e migliori ne traca risultati, di quellochese ciascuno isolatamente le cose tutte a se necessarie soltanto facesse.... 317.) 554 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION which they actually allow to reach the labourer. The snail's pace of this method corresponded in no wise with the commercial requirements of the new world-market that the great discoveries of the end of the 15th century created. 2 Under such fa- vourably prepared conditions the agitation among the factory workers for the repeal of the Act of 1847 was begun. "In Birmingham there is so much competition of masters one against another, that many are ob- liged to do things as employers that they would otherwise be ashamed of; and yet no more money is made, but only the public gets the benefit." 2 The reader will remember the two sorts of Lon- don bakers, of whom one sold the bread at its full price (the "full- priced" bakers), the other below its normal price ("the underpriced," "the undersellers"). Every combination of employed and unemployed disturbs the "harmonious" action of this law. xviii., n. His means of subsistence must therefore be sufficient to maintain him in his normal state as a labouring individual. Even at an advanced rent, the people who are dis- placed will hardly be able to get an accommodation so good as the meagre one they have left. The last process of wholesale expropriation of the agricul- tural population from the soil is, finally, the so-called clearing of estates, i.e., the sweeping men off them. But it secured to them, on the other hand, the privilege of working children between 11 and 13, 10 hours a day, and of annulling in their case the education made compulsory for all other factory children. c, vol. Smuggling and the slave-trade have amply proved all that is here stated." (T. It then becomes the general, socially pre- dominant form of production. Working-day III. 9.) 8 "Remarks on the Commercial Policy of Great Britain," London, 1815. Hence their definition of a productive labourer changes with their com- prehension of the nature of surplus-value. There is no creation of surplus-value. 1848," p. G. Again, a particular product may be used in one and the same process, both as an instrument of labour and as raw material. The capitalist can, therefore, live a more jolly life, and at the same time show more "abstinence." And, finally, all the springs of pro- duction act with greater elasticity, the more its scale extends with the mass of the capital advanced. In the mines the work, inclusive of going and returning, usually last 14 or 15 hours, sometimes even from 3, 4 and 5 o'clock a. c, Fifth Report, p. Generally speaking, the specifically capitalist mode of production ceases to be a mere means of producing relative sur- plus-value, so soon as that mode has conquered an entire branch of production; and still more so, so soon as it has conquered all the important branches. . From the treatment of the production of surplus- value, so far, it follows that not every sum of money, or of value, is at pleasure 1 Further particulars will be given in Book IV. SECTION 2.— -THE MEDIUM OF CIRCULATION a. A spinner treats spindles only as implements for spinning, and flax only as the material that he spins. The productive powers of labour are generally greatest where there is an abun- dance of fertile land.' If, in the first sentence, the productive powers of la- bour mean the smallness of that aliquot part of any produce that goes to those whose manual labour produced it, the sentence is nearly identical, because the remaining aliquot part is the fund whence capital can, if the owner pleases, be accumulated. In simple co-operation, and even in that founded on di- vision of labour, the suppression of the isolated, by the collec- tive, workman still appears to be more or less accidental. And why may not the superior ingenuity and dexterity of our artists and manufacturers, be owing to that freedom and liberty to direct themselves in their own way, and I hope we shall never have them deprived of such privileges and that good living from whence their ingenuity no less than their courage may pro- ceed." 1 Thereupon the author of the "Essay on Trade and Commerce" replies: "If the making of every seventh day an holiday is supposed to be of divine institution, as it implies the appropriating the other six days to labour" (he means cap- ital as we shall soon see) "surely it will not be thought cruel to enforce it ... . This, however, ap- pears to be an abuse not essentially appertaining to capitalist production. to 8.30 p. Rh. Z No. 266, April 7, 1849.) 4 E. 102, 104, 105. For 1872 we find, in round numbers, an increase of 2,b00 horses, 80,000 horned cattle, 68,609 sheep, and a decrease of 236,000 pigs.] Table D INCOMES IN POUNDS STERLING 1862 1863 1864 1865 13,398,938 2,937,899 4,858,800 23,597,574 13,494,091 2,938,823 4,846,497 23,658,631 13,470,700 2,930,874 4,546,147 23,236,298 13,801,616 2,946,072 4,850,199 23,930,340' 1 Tenth Report of the Commissioners of Inland Revenue. In this relation, the iron officiates as a body representing nothing but weight. 910.) "The notion of value contemplates the valuable article as a mere sym- EXCHANGE 91 it be declared that the social characters assumed by objects, or the material forms assumed by the social qualities of labour under the regime of a definite mode of production, are mere symbols, it is in the same breath also declared that these characteristics are arbitrary fictions sanctioned by the so-called universal consent of mankind. FLAX & HEMP Yarn Cloth SILK Yarn Cloth WOOL Woollen and ^ Worsted yarn3 / Cloth lbs. In actual history it is notorious that conquest, enslavement, robbery, murder, briefly force, play the great part. This price which always finally predominates over the accidental market prices of labour and regulates them, this "necessary price" (physiocrats) or "natu- ral price" of labour (Adam Smith) can, as with all other commod- ities, be nothing else than its value expressed in money. What, however, first and foremost distinguishes the circuit C— M— G from the circuit M— G— M, is the inverted order of succession of the two phases. Hence at one and the same time there is produced a two-fold result. Every change in their ratio disturbs the ratio which exists between the gold-prices and the silver-prices of commodities, and thus proves, by facts, that a double standard of value is inconsistent with the functions of a standard. (b.) QuantltatiTe determination of Relative value Every commodity, whose value it is intended to express, is a useful object of given quantity, as 15 bushels of corn, or 100 lbs. Although no official statistics of agriculture existed for England (they did for Ireland), they were voluntarily given in 10 counties. That supply once given, the material may rise or fall in value, or even be, as land and the sea, without any value in itself; but this will have no influence on the creation of value or on the variation in the quantity of value. In this price the labour required for the production of the cotton is al- ready expressed in terms of the average labour of society. It is just because handicraft skill con- tinues, in this way, to be the foundation of the process of produc- tion, that each workman becomes exclusively assigned to a partial function, and that for the rest of his life, his labour-power is turned into the organ of this detail function. Here, however, we are only concerned with the phenomenon in its integrity, and we therefore assume its progress to be normal. W. c, p. . . in Egypt reached the requisite degree of per- fection. l Thus, hand in hand with the expropriation of the self-supporting peasants, with their separa- tion from their means of production, goes the destruction of rural domestic industry, the process of separation between manufac- ture and agriculture. The labour of the spinner was then viewed as specifically different from other kinds of productive labour, different on the one hand in its special aim, viz., spinning, differ- ent, on the other hand, in the special character of its operations, in the special nature of its means of production and in the special use-value of its product. 2 The establishment of a normal working-day is the result of centuries of struggle between capitalist and labourer. in fact be reduced by a third, perhaps, and that then there will be a healthy demand for the remaining two-thirds.... For a particular form of its own use-value. m. Hence the watchword of the mercantilists, balance of trade. c, p. His 20 yards of linen has a definite price, £2. One of its parts, certainly, is determined by the work- ing-time required for the reproduction of the labour-power of the labourer himself. 3 But only since the intro- duction of machinery has the workman fought against the instru- ment of labour itself, the material embodiment of capital. As before, a definite portion of the product will be devoted to re- production. The number employed in iron, copper, lead, tin, and other mines of every description, was 319,222. I worked all night last night, till 6 o'clock this morning. 468 " mother " " " " " 89 " 267 " boy " " " " " 56 " 168 " gir] " " " " " 55 " 165 Total fr. By thus acting on the external world and changing it, he at the same time changes his own nature. 3 On the other hand, the extension of the working-time pro- duces, in its turn, a fall in the price of labour, and with this a fall in the day's or week's wages. On Fridays they always begin sooner, some about ten o'clock, and continue in some cases, at work, either in making or delivering the bread up to 8 p. No sooner has one set been defaced or covered over, than a fresh set is placarded in the former, or some equally public place. He therefore confounds together the laws of the rate of surplus-value and the laws of the rate of profit. In order that the surplus-labour may absorb the whole day (i.e., an average day of any week or year), the necessary la- bour must sink to zero. From the reign of Edward III. "Unfortunate females who, in consequence of the cotton famine, were at its commencement thrown out of employ- ment, and have thereby become outcasts of society; and now, though trade has revived, and work is plentiful, continue members of that unfortunate class, and are likely to continue so. 662 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION As result of the ebbing and flowing of capital and labour, the state of the dwellings of an industrial town may to-day be bearable, to-morrow hideous. a week; my wife works here also, and gets 5s. Comm., V. Their numbers have, in point of fact, increased by 100, but relatively, i.e., in pro- portion to the total capital advanced, they have diminished by 800, for the £2,000 capital would, in the old state of things, have employed 1,200 instead of 400 men. It will be remembered that we met, in the English agricultural proletariat, with a similar spectacle. 100.) Lawyers started long before economists the idea that money is a mere symbol, and that the value of the precious metals is purely imagi- nary. Capital works on both sides at the same time. 24 by 1yd. Other things remaining unchanged, the capital of £6,000, can, in future, employ no more than 50 men. 1 Dr. Edward Smith, during the cotton crisis caused by the American Civil War, was sent by the English Government to Lancashire, Cheshire, and other places, to report on the sanitary condition of the cotton operatives. 1 The "personnel" of this staff consisted of 2 inspectors, 2 assistant in- spectors and 41 sub-inspectors. It is also a power inimical to him, and as such capi- tal proclaims it from the roof tops and as such makes use of it. or 3s. How, then, to heal the anti-capitalistic cancer of the colo- nies? . The iron, as iron, is no more the form of manifestation of weight, than is the sugar-loaf. of the manufacturer are doubled by improvement in machinery ... This at all events is a progress as against the mercantilists who, on their side, derived the excess of the price over the cost of production of the product, from the act of exchange, from the product being sold above its value. the landowner, and say if there could be any suggestion more suicidal to all classes of the country than by enfeebling a nation by exporting the best of its manufacturing population, and destroying the value of some of its most productive 1 It will not be forgotten that this same capital sings quite another song, under ordinary circumstances, when there is a question of reducing wages. Now the parts of engines are produced by labour with less skill, but with good tools. The smaller and medium farmers— I reckon among these all who Q do not cultivate more than 100 acres — still make up about TTjths of the whole number. One party of English economists, in the interest of capital, de- nounces this obstinacy in the most violent manner, another party defends the labourers. 2 In certain cases, the increase in the number of hands employed is only apparent; that is, it is not due to the extension of the factories already established, but to the gradual annexation of connected trades; for instance, the increase in power-looms, and in the hands employed by them between 1838 and 1856, was, in the cotton trade, simply owing to the extension of this branch of industry; but in the other trades to the application of steam- power to the carpet-loom, to the ribbon-loom, and to the linen- 1 "Reports of Insp. l The two phases of this metamorphosis are both of them distinct transactions of the weaver — selling, or the exchange of the com- modity for money; buying, or the exchange of the money for a commodity; and, the unity of the two acts, selling in order to buy. 17. They are both com- modities, and commodities of equal value. G or=w Com. Hence that remarkable phenomenon in the history of Modern Industry, that machinery sweeps away every moral and natural restriction on the length of the working-day. 11-15, passim.) Herrenschwand's fanciful notions amount merely to this, that the antagonism, which has its origin in the nature of commodi- ties, and is reproduced in their circulation, can be removed by increasing 122 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION hand, by the sum of the prices of the circulating commodities, and on the other hand, by the rapidity with which the anti- thetical phases of the metamorphoses follow one another. c, p 48. In the quadrupled product there lies four times as much raw material. Shortly afterwards, however, a worse kind of competition sprang up, namely, that of underselling one an- other in the market. c.,p. The labour-time respectively necessary for the production of the linen and the coat, and therefore the value of these com- modities may simultaneously vary in the same direction, but at unequal rates, or in opposite directions, or in other ways. Say. IV. And as we pre-supposed the limits set by capitalist production, that is to say, pre-supposed the process of social production in a form developed by purely spontaneous growth, we neglected any more rational combination, directly and systematically practi- cable with the means of production, and the mass of labour-power at present disposable. And modern economy, which looks down with such disdain on the monetary an economy, which just as much constituted the material basis of their world, as bourgeois economy constitutes that of our modern world. Beyond this, his necessary labour-time, the labourer, we saw, could continue to work for 2, 3, 4, 6, &c, hours. 320.) 580 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION find in the market the necessaries of life whose value the master has advanced to them. c, pp. Princ d'Econ. These means, therefore, were to them, not capital, but commodities. 2 "Ch. Empl. _ Working-day of 12 hours Value created of 6 sh.~ '• These derivative formulae express, in reality, only the pro- portion in which the working-day, or the value produced by it, is divided between capitalist and labourer. This is effected in two ways: by increasing the speed of the machin- ery, and by giving the workman more machinery to tent. 1 Value, therefore, does not stalk about with a label describing what it is. 1 10 Marshall Street, No. 49 . The large workshop 1 "Je permettrai," says the capitalist, "que vous ayez l'honneur de me servir, a condition que vous me donnez le peu qui vous reste pour la peine que je prends de vous commander." (J.J. Rousseau: "Discours sur l'Economie Po- litique.") REACTION OP THE AGRICULTURAL REVOLUTION 747 (manufacture reunie) will enrich prodigiously one or two entre- preneurs, but the labourers will only be journeymen, paid more or less, and will not have any share in the success of the undertaking. will sow his wheat, for instance, and allow it to remain a twelvemonth in the ground, or leave his wine in a cellar for years, instead of consuming these things or their equivalent at once ... In consequence of the first report of the Commission on the employment of children (1863) the same fate was shared by the manufacturers of all earthenwares (not merely pottery), lucifer-matches, percussion-caps, cartridges, carpets, fustian- cutting, and many processes included under the name of "finish- ing." In the year 1863 bleaching in the open air 4 and baking 1 Thus, e.g., E. Comm. 50-51. DIVISION OF LABOUR AND MANUFACTURE 365 with a given quantity of labour, and, consequently, of cheapen- ing commodities and hurrying on the accumulation of capital. This invention confirms the great doctrine already propounded, that when capital enlists science into her service, the refractory hand of labour will always be taught docility." ' Although Ure's work appeared 30 years ago, at a time when the factory system was comparatively but little developed, it still perfectly expresses the spirit of the factory, not only by its undisguised cynicism, but also by the naivete with which it blurts out the stupid contradictions of the capitalist brain. 3 "Those who are paid by piece-work ... Biese. 2 "The sudden reversion from a system of credit to a system of hard cash heaps theoretical fright on top of the practical panic; and the dealers by whose agency circulation is affected, shudder before the impenetrable mystery in which their own economic relations are involved" (Karl Marx, 1. The possessor of money or commodities actually turns into a capitalist in such cases only where the minimum sum advanced for production greatly exceeds the maximum of the middle ages. It reads all prices backwards, and thus, so to say, depicts itself in the bodies of all other commodities, which offer to it the material for the realisation of its own use-value. 2 Hence, we see that behind all attempts to represent th& circulation of commodities as a source of surplus-value, there lurks a quid pro quo, a mixing up of use-value and exchange-value. One of its main lines of busi- ness, therefore, from 1701-1776, is the lending out of enormous amounts of capital, especially to its great rival England. The capitalist mode of production, while on the one hand, enforcing economy in each individual business, on the oth- er hand, begets, by its anarchical system of competition, the most outrageous squandering of labour-power and of the social means of production, not to mention the creation of a vast number of employ- ments, at present indispensable, but in themselves superfluous. In the labour- process it only serves as a mere use-value, a thing with useful properties, and could not, therefore, transfer any value to the product, unless it possessed such value previously. 8 1. 53 and 7. 151, 154, 155.) In Pact, in this "Paradise of capitalists" there follows, on the smallest change in the price of the most essential means of subsistence, a change in the number of deaths and crimes! (See Manifesto of the Maatschappij: "De Vlamingen Vooruit!" Brussels, 1860, pp. 350, 351.) On the contrary, lowness of wages produces, in its turn, dearness of labour. 297,375 . In the direct barter of products, each commodity is directly a means of exchange to its owner, and to all other persons an equivalent, but that only in so far as it has use-value for them. a proscribed race." 2 The first act of the agricultural revolution was to sweep away the huts situated on the field of labour. The means of production, with which the addi- tional labour-power is incorporated, as well as the necessaries with which the labourers are sustained, are nothing but component parts of the surplus-product, of the tribute annually exacted from the working-class by the capitalist class. "They only exist now by first defrauding the public, and next getting 18 hours' work out of their men for 12 hours' wages." 3 The adulteration of bread and the formation of a class of bakers that sells the bread below the full price, date from the beginning of the 18th century, from the time when the corpo- rate character of the trade was lost, and the capitalist in the form of the miller or flour-factor, rises behind the nominal master baker. There will, perhaps, be more labour, because there will be more compulsion to it. If it seize upon a particular stage in the production of a commodity, the other stages of its production become converted into so many in- dependent industries. Then, not only does the immigration of labourers into the branch of industry in question cease; it gives place to their emigration. and beautifies the whole; altho more especially the particular persons that have it in plenty. The leadership of industry is an attribute of capital, just as in feudal times the functions of general and judge, were attributes of landed property. At every new trick that the capitalist, from day to day, hit upon for keeping his machinery going 12 or 15 hours with- out increasing the number of his hands, the worker had to swallow his meals now in this fragment of time, now in that. 274.) 362 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION the parts of which are men." 1 As a matter of fact, some few man- ufacturers in the middle of the 18th century preferred, for cer- tain operations that were trade secrets, to employ half-idiotic persons. . One, the expenses of developing that power, which expenses vary with the mode of production; the other, its natural diversity, the difference between the labour-power of men and women, of children and adults. I, p. The total value then of the 20 lbs. Variable capital is therefore only a particular historical form of appearance of the fund for providing the necessaries of life, or the labour-fund which the labourer requires for the maintenance of himself and family, and which, whatever be the system of social production, he must himself produce and reproduce. The latter method is the only materialistic, and therefore the only scientific one. 22, n. Nature's direct gift to him is plenty of leisure time. If he advances it for the purposes of production, the ad- vances made come from his own funds, exactly as on the day when he first entered the market. * Factory Inspectors, and at the same time Parliament was, by petitions from the operatives, bereft of its notions as to the cool meadow-fragrance, in which bleaching in the open-air was reported to take place. Hence it is self-evident that the labourer is nothing else, his whole life through, than labour-power, that therefore all his disposable time is by nature and law labour-time, to be devoted to the self-expansion of capital. On the other hand, it can satisfy the manifold wants of the individual producer himself, only in so far as the mutual exchangeability of all kinds of useful private labour is an established social fact, and therefore the private useful labour of each producer ranks on an equality with that of all others. If, on the one hand, the workman be- comes adapted to the process, on the other, the process was pre- viously made suitable to the workman. * Even without an alteration in the system of working, the simultaneous employment of a large number of labourers effects a revolution in the material conditions of the labour-process. 7— d., stocking-weavers 2s. The problem and the means of solution arise simultane- ously. 65.) The most infallible means for reducing this quali- tative difference between the English and Continental working-hour would be a law shortening quantitatively the length of the working-day in Continental factories. This "delicate" parson, from whose work just quoted, as well as from his "Jour- ney through Spain," Malthus often copies whole pages, himself borrowed the greater part of his doctrine from Sir James Steuart, whom he however al- ters in the borrowing. He was not the same as other people in some ways, because he was religious in some ways, and others isn't." (1. Coarse freedom, a noisy jollity, and ob- scenest impudence give attractions to the gang. It increases the social productive power of labour, not only for the benefit of the capitalist instead of for that of the labourer, but it does this by crippling the individual labourers. This, however, demands for society a certain material ground-work or set of conditions of existence which in their turn are the sponta- neous product of a long and painful process of development. They were now transformed into material elements of variable capital. This is his productive consumption. THE WORKING-DAY 239 expression of the same greed. . The lowness of the price of labour acts here as a stimulus to the extension of the labour-time. One thing, however, is clear — Nature does not produce on the one side owners of money or commodities, and on the other men possessing nothing but their own labour-power. But from the moment that the forced labour is changed into wage-labour, from that moment the labour-fund, which the peasant himself continues as before to produce and reproduce, takes the form of a capital advanced in the form of wages by the lord. 4, it was declared perpetual, and in fact only in 1834 did it take a new and harsher iormJ These 1 Dr. Hunter, 1. . c, p. into the original capital and the profit, the increment to the capital ... Nevertheless, the attempt was made to enrich the Indian treasury by the price at which the necessaries of life were sold to the starving people. Ce travail de surveillance qui servirait peut-etre d'utile gymnastique a l'intelligertce, s'il n'etait pas trop prolonge, detruit a la longue, par son exces, et l'intelligence, et le corps meme." (G. * In such cases the effect of the combined labour could either not be pro- duced at all by isolated individual labour, or it could only be pro- duced by a great expenditure of time, or on a very dwarfed scale. Only as personified capital is the capitalist respectable. That, at the first returning de- mand for labour, there would be a deficiency. The soil under cultivation for wheat shows for the last 5 years the following stages of de- crease:-1868, 285,000 acres; 1869, 280,000; 1870, 259,000; 1871, 244,(XX); 1872 228,000. 1 "For two-fold is the use of every object.... 1869. The labourer produces, not for himself, but for capital. Inflammatory sore throat is common, from the same cause. Accord- ing to them the rate of wages in the country, still very low,* has within the last 20 years risen 50-60 per cent., and stands now, on the average, at 6s. Whilst the cotton industry introduced child-slavery in England, it gave in the United States a stimulus to the trans- formation of the earlier, more or less patriarchal slavery, into a system of commercial exploitation. The "glorious Revolution" brought into power, along with William of Orange, the landlord and capitalist appropriators of surplus-value. What alone interests him, is the surplus-value that dwells in it, and is realisable by sale. Their heavy day's work at length completed, they put on better clothes, and accompany the men to the public houses. 1 We have already seen, from the most elementary expression of value, x commodity A=y commodity B, that the object in which the magnitude of the value of another object is represented, appears to have the equivalent form independently of this rela- tion, as a social property given to it by Nature. The serfs, as well as the free small proprietors, held land under very different tenures, and were therefore emancipated under very different economic conditions. But when- ever the coat assumes in the equation of value, the position of equivalent, its value acquires no quantitative expression; on the omists. Note top. 2 Benjamin Thompson: "Essays, Political, Economical, and Philo- sophical, &c," 3 vols., Loud., 1796-1802, vol. But in those cases in which the formal alienation by sale of the use-value of a commodity, is not simultaneous with its actual delivery to the buyer, the money of the latter usually functions as means of payment. "L'esprit des lois, c'est la propriete," sayslJnguet. 1 1. All other cir- cumstances remaining the same, the only mode by which it can reproduce its wealth, and maintain it at one level, is by replacing the means of production — i.e., the instruments of labour, the raw material, and the auxiliary substances consumed in the course of the year— by an equal quantity of the same kind of articles; these must be separated from the mass of the yearly products, and thrown afresh into the process of production. In money-lenders' capital the form M — C — M' is reduced to the two extremes with- out a mean, M — M', money exchanged for more money, a form that is incompatible with the nature of money, and therefore remains inexplicable from the standpoint of the circulation of commodities. Although people do not look a gift-horse in the mouth, our friend does not frequent the market for the purpose of making presents. 165. 1634.) "Would you lay that obligation upon the colliers only, or all the work- people of Great Britain?" "I came to speak for the colliers." (n. We saw in Chapt. 8 On the other hand, the rapid advance of English industry between 1848 and the present time, under the influence of a day of 10 hours, surpasses the advance made between 1833 and 1847, when the day was 12 hours long, by far more than the latter surpasses the advance made during the half century after the first introduction of the factory system, when the working-day was without limits. They contract as free agents, and the agreement they come to, is but the form in which they give legal expression to their common will. Rept," p. "The masters tempt them by extra pay and supper," which they eat in neighbouring public houses. The money is no longer the means that brings about the process. Several writers of that time, and among them some who were considered as eminently benevo- lent, mention with exultation the fact that in that single city, boys and girls of very tender age create wealth exceeding what was necessary for their own subsistence by twelve thousand pounds a year. Nomad races are the first to develop the money-form, because all their worldly goods consist of moveable objects and are therefore directly alienable; and be- cause their mode of life, by continually bringing them into con- tact with foreign communities, solicits the exchange of products. . Second: The part of social capital domiciled in each particular sphere of production is divided among many capitalists who face one another as independent commodity- producers competing with each other. EXPROPRIATION OF AGRICULTURAL POPULATION 723 ants, the country clergy, who had to marry their masters' cast-off mistresses. c, preface. 7-. The code of the corvee, which the Russian General Kisseleff proclaimed in 1831, was of course dictated by the Boyards themselves. Compare, for instance, the higher with the lower branches of mathematics. Fall, 87,337. By S. Three girls of 13, at wages of from 6 shillings to 8 shillings a week, have replaced the one man of mature age, of wages varying from 18 shillings to 45 shillings." (Th. de Quincey: "The Logic of Political Econ.," Lon- don, 1844. On the other hand, gold serves as an ideal measure of value, only because it has already, in the process of exchange, established itself as the money-commodity. E.g. "C'est li compte que messire Jacques de Thoraine, chevalier chastelain sor Besangon rent es-seig- neur tenant les comptes a Dijon pour monseigneur le due et comte de Bourgoi- gne, des rentes appartenant a la dite chastellenie, depuis xxve jour de decem- breMCCCLIX jusqu'au xxviiie jour de decembre MGCCLX." (Alexis Monteil: "Traite de Materiaux Manuscrits etc.," pp. 22. And, in its normal form, the circulation of commodities demands the exchange of equivalents. II., p. 3 1 Karl Marx. This nature itself is not to be deduced from the principle of utility. Thus the "indicated" or "commercial" horse-power of an engine is expressed by a mathematical formula, involving diameter of cylinder, length of stroke, piston speed, and steam pressure, simultaneously, and showing what mul- tiple of 33,000 pounds is really raised by the engine in a minute. But if we deduct the doubling spindles that figure in the numbers for 1856, but not in those for 1862, it will be found that after 1856 the number of 6pindles remained nearly stationary. . In England, for instance, we find the laws of ap- prenticeship, with their seven years' probation, in full force down to the end of the manufacturing period; and they are not thrown on one side till the advent of Modern Industry. If the quantity of unpaid labour supplied by the working-class, and accumulated by the capitalist class, increases so rapidly that its conversion into capital requires an extraordinary addition of paid labour, then wages rise, and, all other circumstances remaining equal, the un- paid labour diminishes in proportion. 7.) CHANGES OF MAGNITUDE 527 day be lengthened by 2 hours and the price of labour-power re- main unaltered, the surplus-value increases both absolutely and relatively. The number of the operatives was, in 1850, 79,737; in 1856, 87,794; in 1862, 86,063; included in these, however, the children under 14 years of age were, in 1850, 9,956; in 1856, 11,228; in 1862, 13,178. Od., paid for seed and manure, is constant capital, and we put it equal to zero. With a general rise in the prices of commodities, the quantity of the circulating medium will remain constant, provided the number of commodities in circulation decrease proportionally to the increase in their prices, or provided the velocity of currency increase at the same rate as prices rise, the number of commodi- ties in circulation remaining constant. surplus-labour closes to us, by means of its equivalent expression, - r-v — J ^ r ' necessary labour the relation between the two parts of the working-day. Commodities circulate, whose equivalent in money will not appear on the scene till some future day. (n. Hereafter we shall see that the contrary assumption would make no difference. If then, on the one hand, finished products are not only results, but also necessary conditions, of the labour-process, on the other hand, their assumption into that process, their contact with living labour, is the sole means by which they can be made to retain their character of use-values, and be utilised. This much, however, is clear, that the middle ages could not live on Catholicism, nor the ancient world on politics. Pol." trad. c, pp. From his standpoint of juridical illusion, he does not regard the law as a product of the material relations of production, but conversely the relations of production as products of the law. Value Export' ed. . All villagers were forbidden to let rooms to single men and women; all the latter were to be reported to the authorities and cast into prison if they w T ere unwilling to become servants, even if they were employed at any other work, such as sowing seeds for the peasants at a daily wage, or even buying and selling corn. For instance, Condillac says: "It is not true that on an exchange of commodities we give value for value. . Daily or weekly wages remain, despite all this, unchanged. But in the weav- ing department, where, moreover, many sorts of figured fancy articles were woven, there was not the slightest alteration in the conditions of the work. A superficial observation of this fact, namely, that in the equation of value, the equivalent figures exclusively as a simple quantity of some article, of some use-value, has misled Bailey, as also many others, both before and after him, into seeing, in the expression of value, merely a quantitative relation. And yet decks himself out, and would be thought pi- ous, so that people may not see where the oxen have gone, that he drags back- wards into his den. Later on, and in truth with this very "principle oi population," struck the hour of the Protestant parsons. . . . It confines the field of action of this law within the limits absolutely convenient to the activity of exploitation and to the domination of. 1 18 persons George Street, No. 130 . of coffee 1 quarter of corn L =20 yards of linen 2 ounces of gold */ 2 a ton of iron x com. On the other hand the quan- tity of the circulating medium may decrease with a decreasing number of commodities, or with an increasing rapidity of their circulation. The same interest, which compels the sycophant of capital, the political economist, in the mother-country, to pro- claim the theoretical identity of the capitalist mode of production with its contrary, that same interest compels him in the colonies to make a clean breast of it, and to proclaim aloud the antagonism 1 We treat here of real Colonies, virgin soils, colonised by free immi- grants. Thus, the equation, 20 yards of linen =1 coat, becomes 20 yards of linen=2 coats, either, because the value of the linen has doubled, or because the value of the coat has fallen by one-half; and it becomes 20 yards of linen = % coat, either, because the value of the linen has fallen by one- half, or because the value of the coat has doubled. Since 1848, the factory inspec- tors have never tired of twitting the masters with this "last," this "fatal hour." Thus Mr. Hovell in his report of the 21st May, 1855: "Had the follow- ing ingenious calculation (he quotes Senior) been correct, every cotton fac- tory in the United Kingdom would have been working at a loss since the year 1850." (Reports of the Insp. 5. Before that, they had always suffered from a deficient supply of yarn." (Gaskell, 1. The conversion of money into capital has to be explained on the basis of the laws that regulate the exchange of commodities r in such a way that the starting-point is the exchange of equiva- lents. The more carefully we examine the history of the past, the more reason shall we find to dissent from those who imagine that our age has been fruitful of new social evils. Laing: "National Distress," &c, London, 1844.) "The great class who have nothing to give for food but ordinary labour, are the great bulk of the people." (James Mill, in art.: "Colony," Supplement to the Encyclop. From this moment the labour of the individual producer acquires socially a two-fold character. The result is embodied in Mr. Scriven's Report of 1841 to the "Children's Employment Commissioners," in the report of Dr. Greenhow of 1860 published by order of the medical officer of the Privy Council (Public Health, 3rd Report, 112-113), lastly, in the report of Mr. Longe of 1862 in the "First Report of the Chil- dren's Employment Commission, of the 13th June, 1863." For my purpose it is enough to take, from the reports of 1860 and 1863, some depositions of the exploited children themselves. In the above example, the value of the labour-power that functions through 12 hours is 3s., a value for the reproduction of which 6 hours are required. edit. Of this £115,000, each of the twenty-three half- hours of work produces 5-U5ths or one twenty-third. a day would have to be em- ployed." (n. in the shop. 16, 21.) 2 1. E.g., when Steuart says: "Here, in slavery, was a forcible method of making mankind diligent," [for the non-workers] ... The blacksmith forges and the product is a forging. 750 CHAPTER XXXI GENESIS OF THE INDUSTRIAL CAPITALIST The genesis of the industrial 1 capitalist did not proceed in such a gradual way as that of the farmer. With reference, therefore, to use- value, there is good ground for saying that "exchange is a trans- action by which both sides gain." 1 It is otherwise with exchange- value. 36.) 378 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION little affected in its choice of residence by local circumstances. "An Essay on the Production of Wealth.' London, 1SZ1, p. Econ.," London, 1767, v. We assumed above that while the total capital increases, its composi- tion remains the same, because the conditions of production re- main constant. This is done by the gangs, or organ- ised bands that dwell in the open villages. insomuch that they are inforced to employ mercenary bands of Switzers and the like, for ttieir battalions of foot; whereby also it comes to pass that those nations have much people and few soldiers." ('The Reign of Henry VII." Verbatim reprint from Rennet's Eng- land. 5 John Bellers remarked as far back as 1699: "The uncertainty of fash- ions does increase necessitous poor. Whether this latter result is the consequence of accumulation or centralisation, whether centralisation is accomplished by the violent method of annexation — when certain capitals become such preponderant centres of attraction for others that they shat- ter the individual cohesion of the latter and then draw the sep- arate fragments to themselves — or whether the fusion of a num- ber of capitals already formed or in process of formation takes place by the smoother process of organising joint-stock compa- nies — the economic effect remains the same. of Insp. would suffice for such revolutions and circulations thereof, as trade requires," Petty replies in his usual masterly manner, "I answer yes: for the expense being 40 millions, if the revolutions 142 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION The development of money into a medium of payment makes it necessary to accumulate money against the dates fixed for the payment of the sums owing. But in no wise conciliated, capital now began a noisy agita- tion that went on for several years. The superficiality of Political Economy shows itself in the fact that it looks upon the expansion and contraction of cred- it, which is a mere symptom of the periodic changes of the indus- trial cycle, as their cause. With its accumulation, therefore, there kept pace, on the whole, a corresponding growth in the demand for labour. Read, e.g., the naive Annals of Commerce of the worthy A. Public opinion .... How will its internal economy be cared for? The managers are, of course, English, as the native Russian capitalist is of no use in factory business. it cer- tainly appears that the former are much better fed than either of 1 Rogers, I. ... If now we equate butyric acid to propyl formate, then, in the first place, propyl formate would be, in this relation, merely a form of existence of G 4 H 8 2 ; and in the second place, we should be stating that butyric acid also consists of C 4 H 8 2 . d. Is. 3-U. "The effect," says Mr. Lord, "on entering low-ceiled workrooms in which 30 to 40 machine hands are working is unbearable. Such properties claim our attention only in so far as they affect the utility of those commodities, make them use-values. Otherwise, however, so soon as the compulsory shortening of the hours of labour takes place. * These separate values are now all concentrated in one thing; but so they were also in the sum of fifteen shillings, before it was split up into three parts, by the purchase of the commodities. "The main difficulty [in the automatic factory]... The total labour-power of society, which is embodied in the sum total of the values of all commodities produced by that society, counts here as one homogeneous mass of human labour- power, composed though it be of innumerable individual units. The change of value in the case we have been considering, originates, not in the process in which the cotton plays the part of a means of production, and in which it therefore functions as constant capital, but in the process in which the cotton itself ;s produced. The gallon loaf per week is what we suppose sufficient for the main- tenance of every person in the family for the week; and the 3d. In the following three years, 1863-1865, there was a progressive rise in the price of meat, butter, milk, sugar, salt, coals, and a number of other necessary means of subsistence. As soon as the exploitation of the women and children takes place on a larger scale it be- comes in turn a new means of making a surplus-population of the male agricultural labourer and of keeping down his wage. . To accumulate it is necessary to convert a portion of the sur- plus-product into capital. l The less labour it contains, the less value leaves pressure of steam and piston speed out of consideration. The Factory Act of 1861 regulates the actual making of the lace, so far as it is done by machinery, and this is the rule in England. This surplus-value is the difference between the value of the prod- uct and the value of the elements consumed in the formation of that product, in other words, of the means of production and the labour-power. It reduces the surplus-labour and surplus-value. A couple of exam- ples from the Reports of the Inspectors of Factories will suffice on this point. It is not to be assumed that we offer for sale articles required for our own consumption. They were placed in every respect on the same footing as the young persons, their work-time limited to twelve hours, their night-labour forbidden, &c. But every year a part of these instruments of labour perishes or reaches the CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO CAPITAL 605 limit of its productive function. 3 The handicraft period bequeathed to us the great inventions of the compass, of gunpowder, of type-printing, and of the auto- matic clock. In the Speech from the Throne, on 5th February, 1867, the Tory Cabinet of the day announced the in- troduction of Bills, founded on the final recommendations of the Commission, which had completed its labours in 1866. White, the certifying surgeon for factories at Downpat- rick, states in his official report, dated the 15th December, 1865: "The serious accidents at the scutching mills are of the most fear- ful nature. The antithesis, use-value and value; the contradictions that private labour is bound to manifest itself as direct social labour, that a particularised concrete kind of labour has to pass for abstract human labour; the contradiction between the personification of objects and the representation of persons by things; all these an- titheses and contradictions, which are immanent in commodities, assert themselves, and develop their modes of motion, in the antithetical phases of the metamorphosis of a commodity. 521.) 336 CHAPTER XIV DIVISION OF LABOUR AND MANUFACTURE SECTION 1.— TWO-FOLD ORIGIN OF MANUFACTURE That co-operation which is based on division of labour, assumes its typical form in manufacture, and is the prevalent character- istic form of the capitalist process of production throughout the manufacturing period properly so called. . Say and F. 2. The bills granted or credits opened, to-day, need have no resemblance whatever, either in quantity, amount, or duration, to those granted or entered upon to-morrow .or next day; nay, many of to-day's bills, and credits, when due, fall in with a mass of liabil- ities whose origins traverse a range of antecedent dates altogether indefinite, bills at 12, 6, 3 months or 1 often aggregating together to swell the common liabilities of one particular day..." ("The Currency Theory Reviewed; in a Letter to the Scottish people." By a Banker in England. The buyer converts money back into commodities before he has turned commodities into money: in other words, he achieves the second metamorphosis of commodities before the first. "In these spacious halls the benignant power of steam summons around him his myriads of willing menials." 1 Along with the tool, the skill of the workman in handling it passes over to the machine. c, pp. The fact is that, as the Irish population diminishes, the Irish rent-rolls swell; that depop^ ulation benefits the landlords, therefore also benefits the soil, and, therefore, the people, that mere accessory of the soil. I., p. c, 64, p. 61, seq.). If the slave is absent a fortnight, he is condemned to slavery for life and is to be branded on forehead or back with the letter S; if he runs away thrice, he is to be executed as a felon. It can almost be said that modern society lives at the expense of the proletarians, on what it keeps out of the remuneration of labour." (Sis- mondi: "Etudes, &c," t. (1863) and VI. Once more we find the earth to be a universal in- strument of this sort, for it furnishes a locus standi to the labourer and a field of employment for his activity. So also physical forces, like steam, water, &c, when appropriated to productive processes, cost nothing. But the two latter factors have increased enormously since those days. This is the first negation of individual private property, as founded on the labour of the proprietor. THE WORKING-DAY 273 father of Political Economy, and to some extent the founder of Statistics, says in a work that he published in the last third of the 17th century: "Labouring-men (then meaning field-labourers) work 10 hours per diem, and make 20 meals per week, viz., 3 a day for working-days, and 2 on Sundays; whereby it is plain, that if they could fast on Friday nights, and dine in one hour and an half, whereas they take two, from eleven to one; thereby 1 1 thus working ^ more, and spending kk less, the above-men- tioned (tax) might be raised." 1 Was not Dr. Andrew Ure right in crying down the 12 hours' bill of 1833 as a retrogression to the times of the dark ages? . MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OF COMMODITIES 123 sate each other, so that notwithstanding their continued insta- bility, the sum of the prices to be realised and the quantity of money in circulation remain constant; consequently, we find, especially if we take long periods into consideration, that the deviations from the average level, of the quantity of money current in any country, are much smaller than we should at first sight expect, apart of course from excessive perturbations periodically arising from industrial and commercial crises, or, less frequently, from fluctuations in the value of money. Fact., 31st October, 1865," p. In 1814, in the same county, the weekly wage was 12s. Hence a lessened demand for those commodi- ties— voila tout. But hitherto no one ha3 discovered the art of catching fish in waters that contain none. , one, two, or three years, it may be, will produce the quan- tity.... The legal day's work for some kinds of agri- cultural labour is interpretable in such a way that the day begins in May and ends in October. c. Three days' surplus-labour in the week remain three days that yield no equivalent to the labourer himself, wheth- ness. II., p. Brodie, Sir G. But now the cry is everywhere: money alone is a commod- ity! As the hart pants after fresh water, so pants his soul after money, the only wealth. 3 The Act passed in 1860, determined that, in regard to dye and bleach- works, the working-day should be fixed on August 1st, 1861, provision- ally at 12 hours, and definitely on August 1st, 1862, at 10 hours, i.e., at 10-^- hours for ordinary days, and 7-s- for Saturday. He then continues: "Some time... . This, however, is possible only in a society in which the great mass of the produce of labour takes the form of commodities, in which, consequently, the dominant relation between man and man, is that of owners of commodities. It cannot be denied, in the above instance, that the machinery not only liberates 50 men, thus plac- ing them at others' disposal, but, at the same time, it withdraws from their consumption, and sets free, means of subsistence to the value of £1,500. What appears to happen is, not that gold becomes money, in consequence of all other commodities expressing their values in it, but, on the contrary, that all other commodities universally express their values in gold, because it is money. m. . 17.) Adam Smith, "had the atrocious wickedness to propagate atheism through the land (viz., by his "Theory of Moral Sentiments"). Capitalist production complete- ly tears asunder the old bond of union which held together agri- culture and manufacture in their infancy. The young people migrate to the eastern mining districts of Glamorgan and Monmouth. The variations of the different factors may mutually compen- the circulating medium. The natural grass of Glen Tilt was among the most nutritive in the county of Perth. If history took a long time to get at the bottom of the mystery of wages, nothing, on the other hand, is more easy to understand than the necessity, the raison d'etre, of this phenomenon. On the other hand, the surplus- value arising from the curtailment of the necessary labour-time, and from the corresponding alteration in the respective lengths of the two components of the working-day, I call relative surplus- value. 526 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION III. April number, 1850, p. since what they gain as sellers, they precisely expend io the quality of buyers." ("The Essential Principles of the Wealth of Nations, &c, London, 1797, p. How comes it, however, that a great num- ber, we might say, a great majority, of labourers, live in a more economical way? If this rate, e.g., were 100 per cent., the working-day might be of 8, 10, 12, or more hours. An adequate form of manifestation of value, a fit embodiment of abstract, undifferentiated, and therefore equal human labour, that material alone can be whose every sample exhibits the same uniform qualities. Gold and silver coin, on the other hand, are mostly relegated to the sphere of retail trade. But neither the quit-rent-corn nor the tithe-corn became commodities by reason of the fact that they had been produced for others. c, p. Consequently it was the analysis of the prices of commodities that alone led to the determination of the magnitude of value, and it was the common expression of all commodities in money that alone led 1 "What are we to think of a law that asserts itself only by periodical revolutions? the whole of the annual savings, added to the fixed capital, would have no effect in increasing the demand for labour." (John Barton, "Observations on the Circumstances which Influence the Condition of the Labouring Classes of Society." London, 1817, pp. But no, he becomes importunate. The old nobility had been devoured by the great feudal wars. Answer of the legislature: A thing is produced "when it is made," and it is made when it is ready for sale. 19. For the si Ik- weavers of Macclesfield the average was only Is. 8y d. It is now no longer the labourer that em- ploys the means of production, but the means of production that em- ploy the labourer. 2 We cull here a few character- istic passages, in which the proprietary rights of capital over labour-power are unblushingly asserted. "Two souls, alas, do dwell within his breast; The one is ever parting from the other." 1 At the historical dawn of capitalist production,— and every capitalist upstart has personally to go through this historical stage — avarice, and desire to get rich, are the ruling passions. Since no commodity can stand in the relation of equiva- lent to itself, and thus turn its own bodily shape into the expres- sion of its own value, every commodity is compelled to choose some other commodity for its equivalent, and to accept the use- value, that is to say, the bodily shape of that other commodity as the form of its own value. 1 F. 1 "II (l'argent) n'a d'autre mouvement que celui qui lui est imprim6 par les productions." (Le Trosne, 1. 446 165 999 qs. With an increasing daily or weekly wage the price of labour may remain nominally constant, and yet may fall below its normal level. It has use-value for others; but for himself its only direct use-value is that of being a depository of exchange-value, and, consequently, a means of exchange. 165. "Ueber die Entar- tung des Menschen," Erlangen, 1868. The relative form of the value of the linen pre-supposes, therefore, the presence of some other commodity— here the coat- under the form of an equivalent. Moreover, the debts contracted each day, and the payments falling due on the same day, are quite incommensurable quantities. Nevertheless, its result is: (1) that the product belongs to the capitalist and not to the worker; (2) that the value of this product includes, besides the value of the capital advanced, a surplus-value which costs the worker labour but the capitalist nothing, and which none the less becomes the legitimate prop- erty of the capitalist; (3) that the worker has retained his labour-power and can sell it anew if he can find a buyer. 26. Since the wages for piece-work were unaltered, the weekly wages depended on the quantity produced. But this dreadful "last hour," about which you have invented more stories than have the millenarians about the day of judg- ment, is "all bosh." If it goes, it will cost neither you, your net profit, nor the boys and girls whom you employ, their "purity of mind." 1 Whenever your "last hour" strikes in earnest, think 1 If, on the one hand, Senior proved that the net profit of the manufac- turer, the existence of the English cotton industry, and England's command of the markets of the world, depend on "the last working-hour," on the other hand, Dr. Andrew Ure showed, that if children and young persons under 18 years of age, instead of being kept the full 12 hours in the warm and pure moral atmosphere of the factory, are turned out an hour sooner into the heartless and frivolous outer world, they will be deprived, by idleness and vice, of all hope of salvation for their souls. Comm., Fourth Report," Lond., 1865, p. The difficulty in forming a concept of the money-form, con- sists in clearly comprehending the universal equivalent form, and as a necessary corollary, the general form of value, form G. c, 284., p. 586.) "Then you have a very poor opinion of the integrity of mining engineers?" "It is most certainly unjust and inequitable." (n. Irish genius discovered an altogether new way of spiriting a poor people thousands of miles away from the scene of its misery. Within the last few days the walls of London have been placarded with large posters, bearing the following remarkable announcement: — 'Fat oxen! Starving men! The fat oxen from their palace of glass have gone to feed the rich in their luxu- rious abode, while the starving men are left to rot and die in their wretched dens.' The placards bearing these ominous words are put up at certain inter- vals. The spirit of the Statute of Labourers of 1349 and of its offshoots, comes out 1 "Whenever the legislature attempts to regulate the differences be- tween masters and their workmen, its counsellors are always the masters," says A. P. S. Reduce, compress the cotton trade by taking away its working power and reducing their wages expenditure, say one-fifth, or five millions, and what then would happen to the class above, the small shopkeepers; and what of the rents, the cottage rents.... c. Empl. Comm. For the end ol the 18th century cl. Com. 368 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION the whole disposable working-time of the manufacturing labour- ers, that manufactures are short-lived, and change their locality from one country to another with the emigrating or immigrating workmen, these facts would speak volumes. 274.) THE GENERAL FORMULA FOR CAPITAL 149 place, so soon as the purchased commodity is resold, in other words, so soon as the circuit M— G— M is completed. The first definition given above of productive labour, a definition deduced from the very nature of the produc- tion of material objects, still remains correct for the collective labourer, considered as a whole. Since the relative form of value of a commodity — the linen, for example — expresses the value of that commodity, as being something wholly different from its substance and properties, as being, for instance, coat-like, we see that this expression itself indicates that some social relation lies at the bottom of it. Thus we see, that machinery, while augmenting the human material that forms the principal object of capital's exploiting power, 2 at the same time raises the degree of exploitation. 1862.) The undersellers, almost without exception, sell bread adulterated with alum, soap, pearl ashes, chalk, Derbyshire stone- dust, and such like agreeable nourishing and wholesome ingredients. the owners of the works. 1733.) "Would you prohibit the employment of women in factories also?" "No, I would not." {n. The ratio of the corvee to the necessary labour ^- or 66-r- % gives a much smaller rate of surplus-value than that which regulates the la- bour of the English agricultural or factory labourer. it is carried into the Tower, and coined. It came into effect on September lbth, 1844. . After this be- gins "over-time" which is paid a little better. In so far as it is not immediate transformation of slaves and serfs into wage-labourers, and therefore a mere change of form, it only means the expropriation of the immediate producers, i.e., the dissolution of private prop- erty based on the labour of its owner. 92 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION place at the source of its production by means of barter. Ainsi l'autorite dans l'atelier et celle dans la societe, par rapport a la division du travail, sent en raison inverse l'une de l'autre." (Karl Marx, "Misere", &c, pp. owing to the greater attention and activity required by the greatly in- creased speed which is given to the machinery." 2 In the year 1844, Lord Ashley, now Lord Shaftesbury, made in the House of Com- 1 The moral element played an important part in the above experiments. 235-314 passim. c. . Owen: "Observations on the Effects of the Manufacturing System," 2nd Ed., Lond., 1817.) 2 The English, who have a tendency to look upon the earliest form of appearance of a thing as the cause of its existence, are in the habit of at- tributing the long hours of work in factories to the extensive kidnapping of children, practised by capitalists in the infancy of the factory system, on workhouses and orphanages, by means of which robbery, unresisting mater- ial for exploitation was procured. c, p. Money that circulates in the latter manner is thereby transformed into, becomes capital, and is already potentially capital. Thus many labourers were compelled to seek shelter in villages and towns. Luxury enters into capital's expenses of representa- tion. The English economists of course explained the famine of the Gaels in 1847, by their over-population. The original capital of £10,000 brings in a surplus-value of £2,000, which is capitalised. "Now the following analysis (!) will show that in a mill so worked, the whole net profit is derived from the last hour. Now suppose we have a working-day whose length, and whose apportion- ment between necessary labour and surplus-labour, are given. The law of the supply and demand of labour falls to pieces. Let us consider, on the other hand, the capitalist. Still, the mass of the circulating medium in a given country never sinks below a certain minimum easily ascertained by actual experience. c. I shall revert to these Acts and to the new Mining Act of 1872 in Volume II. The means of payment enters the circulation, but only after the commodity has left it. The following table shows the distribution of these incomes in the two years: Year ending April 5th, 1864. 234 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION acquires it. . 14th, 1843— "It is one of the most melancholy features in the social state of this country that we see, beyond the possibility of denial, that while there is at this moment a decrease in the consuming powers of the people, an increase of the pressure of privations and distress; there is at the same time a constant accumulation of wealth in the upper classes, an increase of the luxuriousness of their habits, and of their means of enjoyment.** (Hansard, 13th Feb.) 652 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION rate, whether the extremes of poverty are less, I do not presume to say" 1 How lame an anti-climax! If the working-class has re- mained "poor," only "less poor" in proportion as it produces for the wealthy class "an intoxicating augmentation of wealth and power," then it has remained relatively just as poor. 1,097,937 „ 1,044 „ 1,066,912,, 121 „ 1,320,996,, 186 ., Of these . My illustration is entirely on the lines of those given by the above named economists. But the division of la- bour in manufacture makes this increase in the number of workmen a technical necessity. The law is satisfied, but is humanity?" Besides "the destruc- tive influence of night-labour on the human organism," stress is also laid upon "the fatal influence of the association of the two sexes by night in the same badly-lighted workshops." 3 "For instance, there is within my district one occupier who, within the same curtilage, is at the same time a bleacher and dyer under the Bleaching and Dyeing Works Act, a printer under the Print Works Act, and a finisher under the Factory Act." (Report of Mr. Baker, in Reports, &c, for October 31st, 1861, p. Some of the masters themselves murmured: "On account of the contradictory decisions of the magistrates, a condition of things altogether ab- normal and anarchical obtains. Emp. of yarn, * it follows that in six hours he will convert 10 lbs. 31. . Vanderlint, 1. The crea- tion of a normal working-day is, therefore, the product of a pro- tracted civil war, more or less dissembled, between the capitalist class and the working-class. can at anytime be reconverted into e , T T , - , Surplus-labour of 6 hours , formulae I. Rep.," p. And if their value rise either slower or faster than that of money, the fall or rise in their prices will be determined by the differ- ence between the change in their value and that of money; and so on. The same value in variable capital therefore sets in movement more labour-power, and, therefore, more labour. In one place the knight reasons as follows: "Knight: You, my neighbour, the husbandman, you Maister Mercer, and you Goodman Cooper, with other artificers, may save yourselves metely well. Locke asserts point blank the connex- ion between the absence of value in gold and silver, and the determination of their values by quantity alone. 1737.) "Can you see any difference in the circumstances of women em- ployed in ironworks, and the circumstances of women employed above ground in collieries?" "I have not ascertained anything as to that." (n. THE WORKING-DAY 277 lowing proper time for meals, in such manner that there shall remain 12 hours of neat-labour." 1 Twelve working-hours daily in the Ideal Workhouse, in the "House of Terror" of 1770! 63 years later, in 1833, when the English Parliament reduced the working-day for children of 13 to 18, in four branches of industry to 12 full hours, the judgment day of English Industry had dawned! In 1852, when Louis Bonaparte sought to secure his position with the bourgeoisie by tampering with the legal working-day, the French people cried out with one voice "the law that limits the working-day to 12 hours is the one good that has remained to us of the legislation of the Republic!" 2 At Zurich the work of children over 10, is limited to 12 hours; in Aargau in 1862, the work of children between 13 and 16, was reduced from 12-^- to 12 hours; in Austria in 1860, for children between 14 and 16, the same reduction was made. On the other hand, to the same extent as the system of credit is extended, so is the function of money as a means of payment. 1 Especially in the original form of the power-loom, we recognise, at the first glance, the ancient loom. It would be foreign to the purpose of this report to enter upon any discussion of the merits of the above apology. 1 First let us consider this transaction from the standpoint of the individual capitalist. No poison kills vermin with more cer- tainty than the Factory Act removes such everlasting barriers. if the factory-owners choose." 2 Workmen and factory inspectors protested on hygienic and moral grounds, but Capital answered: "My deeds upon my head! I crave the law, The penalty and forfeit of my bond." In fact, according to statistics laid before the House of Com- mons on July 26th, 1850, in spite of all protests, on July 15th, 1850, 3,742 children were subjected to this "practice" in 257 factories. The same thing is going on to-day between England and the United States. 602 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION which the English Dogberries acted in their "legal" fixing of a wages tariff: "The squires of Norfolk had dined, says Mr. Burke, when they fixed the rate of wages; the squires of Berks evidently thought the labourers ought not to do so, when they fixed the rate of wages at Speenhamland, 1795 There they decide that 'income (weekly) should be 3s., for a man,' when the gallon or half- peck loaf of 8 lbs. c. Here we have an increase in the number of products, unaccompanied by a fall in their individual prices: as their number increases, so does the sum of their prices. What, first of all, practically concerns producers when they make an exchange, is the question, how much of some other product they get for their own? of cotton never becomes a constituent element of the yarn, yet assuming this amount of waste to be normal and inevitable under average conditions of spinning, its value is just as surely transferred to the value of the yarn, as is the value of the 100 lbs. 74, 75.) POO CAPITALIST PRODUCTION along with labour, to the production of commodities, no more than the price of tools contributes along with the tools them- selves. 175. of Fact.," 31st October, 1849, p. — [Added in the 4th German edition. 206. Must we, for such a tempo- rary inconvenience, abolish the use of the knife? 1 "In general and within certain limits, exceeding the medium size of their kind, is evidence of the prosperity of organic beings. They both augment the mass of articles produced in a given time. "Improvements" of towns, accompanying the increase of wealth, by the demolition of badly built quarters, the erection of palaces for banks, ware- houses, &c, the widening of streets for business traffic, for the carriages of luxury, and for the introduction of tramways, &c, drive away the poor into even worse and more crowded hiding places. c, pp. The rate of accu- mulation lessens; but with its lessening, the primary cause of that lessening vanishes, i.e., the disproportion between capital and exploitable labour-power. It produced, so early as 1851, over 180,000,000 of pens yearly, and con- sumed 120 tons of steel. 904.) 2 "L'echange est de sa nature un contrat d'egalite qui se iait de valeur pour valeur egale. * The matter takes quite another aspect, when we contemplate, not the single capitalist, and the single labourer, but the capital- ist class and the labouring class, not an isolated process of produc- tion, but capitalist production in full swing, and on its actual so- cial scale. Whence arose the illu- sions of the monetary system? On the other hand, the last report of the "Child. This applies still more to diamonds. 31, 32. His emancipation at once transformed him into a free proletarian, who, moreover, found his master ready waiting for him in the towns, for the most part handed down as legacies from the Roman time. Similarly in the London furniture workshops, etc. Ricardo has, it may be noted in passing, tried in vain to make clear to J. 3 "In some parts of the Highlands of Scotland, not many years ago, every peasant, according to the Statistical Account, made his own shoes of leather tanned by himself. worth of red her- ring, Id. salt, Id. vinegar, 2d. This is to some extent the case in new Ameri- can settlements, where a passion for owning land prevents the existence of a class of labourers for hire." 1 So long, therefore, as the labourer can accumulate for himself — and this he can do so long as he remains possessor of his means of production- capitalist accumulation and the capitalistic mode of production are impossible. In the healthiest situations, on hill sides fronting the sea, the faces of their famished children are as pale as they could be in the foul atmosphere of a London alley. The law of the determination of value by la- bour-time, a law which brings under its sway the individual capi- talist who applies the new method of production, by compelling him to sell his goods under their social value, this same law, acting as a coercive law of competition, forces his competitors to adopt the new method. of gold), £2 is the expression in money of the magnitude of the value of the quarter of wheat, or is its price. Manufacture, therefore, develops a hierarchy of labour-powers, to which there corresponds a scale of wages. This gratuitous service of past labour, when seized and filled with a soul by living labour, increases with the advancing stages of accumulation. "Although my official point of view," he says, "is one exclusively physical, common humanity requires that the other aspect of this evil should not be ignored .... Bright's partners had introduced new machinery which would turn out 240 yards of carpet in the time and with the labour (!) previously required to produce 160 yards. Nothing that can be advanced now on this subject, could have the force that it had then, before steam had halved all distances and established new regulations for transit. 39, says "one man has employed himself a week in providing this necessary of life .. It may here be incidentally observed, that Descartes, in defining animals as mere machines, saw with eyes of the manufacturing period, while to eyes of the middle ages, animals were assist- ants to man, as they were later to Von Haller in his "Restauration der Staatswissenschaften." That Descartes, like Bacon, anticipated an altera- tion in the form of production, and the practical subjugation of Nature by Man, as a result of the altered methods of thought, is plain from his "Dis- cours de la Methode." He there says: "II est possible (by the meth- ods he introduced in philosophy) de parvenir a des connaissances fort utiles a la vie, et qu'au lieu de cette philosophic speculative qu'on enseigne dans les ecoles, on en peut trouver une pratique, par laquelle, connaissant la force et les actions du feu, de l'eau, de l'air,des astres, et de tous les autres corps qui nous environnent, aussi distinctement que nous connaissons les divers me- tiers de nos artisans, nous les pourrions employer en meme facon a tous les usages auxquels ils sont propres, et ainsi nous rendre comme maitres et pos- sesseurs de la nature" and thus "contribuer au perfectionnement de la vie humaine." In the preface to Sir Dudley North's "Discourses upon Trade" (1691) it is stated, that Descartes' method had begun to free Political Economy from the old fables and superstitious notions of gold, trade, &c. Hence, one "nominal" horse-power may exert three, four, or even five "indicated" or "real" horse-powers. Go well, member of the Factory Commission of 1833, after careful investigation of the spinning trade, came to the con- clusion that, "in England wages are virtually lower to the capi- talist, though higher to the operative than on the Continent of Europe." (Ure, p. It is only after men have raised themselves above the rank of animals, when therefore their labour has been to some extent socialised, that a state of things arises in which the surplus-labour of the one becomes a condition of exist- ence for the other. B. 8.) "But let not the lovers of truth be discouraged. The reason is simply that, with the increasing productivity of labour, not only does the mass of the means of production consumed by it increase, but their value compared with their mass diminishes. 11.) "Conversion of revenue into capital." (Malthus: "Princ. Under these circum- stances, each article costs one shilling: sixpence for the value of the means of production, and sixpence for the value newly added in working with those means. Twelve girls ironing and doing-up in a small room about 10 feet square, in the centre of which is a close stove. of Fact., 31st October, 1865," pp. 24; p. "And even in the former case" (when the work- man is a wage-labourer to whom the capitalist advances all the necessaries of life, he the labourer), "may be looked upon in the same light" (i.e., as a capitalist), "since, contributing his labour at less than the market-price, (!) he may be regarded as lending * On the basis of a suggestion Marx made to N. Assuming this product to be 10 lbs. of mill-owners working by shifts, the number amounts to 114, and has been for some time rapidly increasing. The minimum number that any given capi- talist is bound to employ is here prescribed by the previously es- tablished division of labour. of yarn can be made. "Artistic criticism is "harmful," because it disturbs worthy people in their enjoyment of Martin Tupper, etc. 59. Let us now picture to ourselves, by way of change, a commu- nity of free individuals, earning on their work with the means of production in common, in which the labour-power of all the different individuals is consciously applied as the combined la- bour-power of the community. An immeasurable interval of time sepa- rates the state of things in which a man brings his labour-power to market for sale as a commodity, from that state in which hu- man labour was still in its first instinctive stage. Cependant ils croient que la production de richesse qui resulte des travaux des artisans consiste dans l'augmentation de la valeur venale de leurs ou- vrages." (Quesnay: "Dialogues sur le Commerce et les Travaux des Artisans," pp. The law of capitalist production, that is at the bottom of the pretended "natural law of population," reduces itself simply to this: The correlation between accumulation of capital and rate of wages is nothing else than the correlation between the unpaid labour transformed into capital, and the additional paid labour necessary for the setting in motion of this additional capital. During part of the day this force must rest, sleep; during another part the man has to satisfy other physical needs, to feed, wash, and clothe himself. Even at the beginning of Louis XVI.'s reign (Ordinance of July 13th, 1777) every man in good health from 16 to 60 years of age, if without means of subsistence and not practising a trade, is to be sent to the galleys. 2, 3. A disease of the skin, no doubt from the irritation of the dirt contained in the Surat cotton, also prevails.... 1 Capital- 1 See Liebig: "Die Chemie in ihrer Anwendung auf Agricultur und Physi- ologie," 7.Aufiage, 1862, and especially the "Einleitung in die Naturgesetze des Feldbaus," in the 1st Volume. P. per week, and the weavers from 2s. Paris, 1846.) MACHINERY AND MODFRN INDUSTRY 423 system to the uttermost, it does away with the many-sided play of the muscles, and confiscates every atom of freedom, both in bodily and intellectual activity. The quantity of air for each person under the circumstances just described corresponds to that which he would have if he were shut up in a box of 4 feet measuring each way, the whole night. xx., § 82, and xxiii., n. Buying in order to sell, or, more accurately, buying in order to sell dearer, M — C — M', appears certainly to be a form peculiar to one kind of capital alone, namely, merchants' capital. The labour, however, that forms the substance of value, is homogeneous human labour, expenditure of one uniform la- bour-power. Every individual capital is a larger or smaller concentration of means of production, with a corresponding command over a THE GENERAL LAW OP CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 625 larger or smaller labour-army. (2.) Every change in the relation between the magnitudes of surplus-value and of the value of labour-power arises from a change in the absolute magnitude of the surplus-labour, and consequently of the surplus-value. The weekly average of the liquid means of nourishment in the families varied from 3 seven ounces in the needle-women to 24-r- ounces in the stocking- makers. So we go on from day to 1. 116. 2 "Rep. The labour of the free peasants on their common land was transformed into corvee for the thieves of the common land. We now turn to the factory as a whole, and that in its most perfect form. The number of implements that he himself can use simultaneously, is limited by the number of his own natural in- struments of production, by the number of his bodily organs. . Bodily labour, it's a primitive institution of God . Deipn. Engels und Karl Marx: "Manifest der Kommunistischen Partei." Lond. The movements of the individual capitals, and of the personal rev- enues, cross and intermingle and are lost in the general change of places, in the circulation of the wealth of society; this dazes the sight, and propounds very complicated problems for solution. Now Chrematistic is distinguishable from (Economic in this way, that "in the case of Chrematistic circulation is the source of riches (tioiiq-cixt) ypr)}iaT(ov... In 1864 there were in that country 1,800 of these mills. The whole mass of the vein must therefore be crushed and the gold either washed out or extracted by means of mercury. 41. But since, on your assumption, his wages, and the surplus-value he yields, are of equal value, it is clear that he produces his wages 3 3 in 5-7- hours, and your net profit in the other 5^- hours. Stuart allowed the so-called relay system during the 15 hours of the factory day throughout Scotland, where it soon flourished again as of old. In the mixing, scribbling and carding rooms, the dust and dirt which are disengaged, irritate the air passages, and give rise to cough and difficulty of breathing. At the same time, though with diminishing vitality, the machine as a whole continues to take part in the labour-process. 248 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION proposal "to stop the machines at least during meal-times." A clause, says Mr. Otley, manager of a wall-paper factory in the Borough, "which allowed work between, say 6 a. So in Eng- lish to save has the same two meanings: sauver and epargner. Re- turn, etc." 8 March, 1861, London, 1862. It would enforce upon them regular and moderate hours; it would lead to their places of work being kept in a healthy and cleanly state; it would therefore husband and improve that store of physical strength on which their own well-being and that of the country so much depends; it would save the rising generation from that over- exertion at an early age which undermines their constitutions and leads to premature decay; finally, it would ensure them — at least up to the age of 13— the opportunity of receiving the elements of education, and would put an end to that utter igno- rance ... 2 The 1 In the 12th century, so renowned tor its piety, they included amongst commodities some very delicate things. The simple circulation of commodities begins with a sale and ends with a purchase, while the circulation of money as capital begins with a purchase and ends with a sale. "In Limerick, where the grievances of the journeymen are dem- onstrated to be excessive, the movement has been defeated by the opposition of the master bakers, the miller bakers being the greatest opponents. In the United States it is as yet only virtually that agricultural machines replace labourers; in other words, they allow of the cultivation by the farmer of a larger surface, but do not actually expel the labourers employed. Besides, where nothing is, the king has lost his rights; whatever may be the merit of his abstinence, there is nothing wherewith specially to remu- nerate it, because the value of the product is merely the sum of the values of the commodities that were thrown into the process of pro- duction. 1 "Political economists are too apt to consider a certain quantity of capital and a certain number of labourers as productive instruments of uni- form power, or operating with a certain uniform intensity... Within a family, 2 and after further development within a tribe, there springs up naturally a division of labour, caused by differences of sex and age, a division that is consequently based on a purely physiological foundation, which division enlarges its materials by the expansion of the community, by the increase of population, and more especially, by the conflicts between differ- ent tribes, and the subjugation of one tribe by another. These are the beauties of "free" capitalist produc- tion!* The very defective Act, passed in 1872, is the first that reg- ulates the hours of labour of the children employed in mines, and makes exploiters and owners, to a certain extent, responsible for so-called accidents. . 20. 14, I make the following remark on this point — "It is not difficult to understand what 'service' the category 'service' must render to a class of economists like J. a., whether the same 6 millions (gold)... CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO CAPITAL 583 The accumulation of the first additional capital of £2,000 pre-supposes a value of £10,000 belonging to the capitalist by vir- tue of his "primitive labour," and advanced by him. 1 In its stead we have its value-shape— the money. M. 726 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION and many other families who were chiefly employed and sup- ported by them." 1 It was not only the land that lay waste, but often land cultivated either in common or held under a definite rent paid to the community, that was annexed by the neighbour- ing landlords under pretext of enclosure. The capabilities of the tool are eman- cipated from the restraints that are inseparable from human la- bour-power. "The labour- ers ... Then the free labourer gives the capitalist every week 6x6 or 36 hours of surplus- labour. Once for all I may here state, that by classical Political Economy, I understand that economy 'which, since the time of W. It was not till it did this, that it built up for itself a fitting technical foundation, and stood on its own feet. The "societies Monopolia" of Luther were power- ful levers for concentration of capital. . This division of labour is a necessary condition for the production of commodities, but it does not follow, conversely, that the production of commodities is a necessary condition for the division of labour. These dates depend, apart from other revolutions in the wheel of reproduction, on conditions closely connected with the seasons. Bell, Mr. Guthrie, &c, in a word, the most distinguished physicians and surgeons in London, had declared in their evidence before the House of Commons, that there was danger in delay. During the last five or six years it had been screwed up to 14, 18, and 20 hours, and under a specially severe pressure of holiday-makers, at times of excursion trains, it often lasted for 40 or 50 hours without a break. Suppose that 80 per cent, were capitalised and 20 per cent, eaten up, the accumulated capital will be £2,400 or £1,200, ac- cording as the total surplus-value has amounted to £3,000 or £1,500. T Surplus-labour Surplus-value _ Surplus-product Working-day ""Value of the Product - Total Product One and the same ratio is here expressed as a ratio of labour- times, of the values in which those labour-times are embodied, and of the products in which those values exist. On the other hand, the values of the means of production used up in the process are preserved, and present themselves afresh as constituent parts of the value of the product; the values of the cotton and the spindle, for instance, re-appear again in the value of the yarn. And beyond all measure hopeless is the wish that persons thus circumstanced should ever in other respects aspire to that atmosphere of civilisation which has its essence in physical and moral cleanliness." 2 London takes the first place in over-crowded habitations, absolutely unfit for human beings. c, p. m. They are, therefore, at the same time methods of the production of capital by capital, or methods of its accelerated accumulation. 18. This has actually occurred in the last Colony founded by Englishmen— the Swan River Settlement— where a great mass of capital, of seeds, imple- ments, and cattle, has perished for want of labourers to use it, and where no settler has preserved much more capital than he can employ with his own hands." 2 We have seen that the expropriation of the mass of the people from the soil forms the basis of the capitalist mode of production. Hence, in such events, the form under which money appears is of no importance. In general, the greater the productiveness of labour, the less is the labour-time required for the production of an article, the less is the amount of labour crystallised in that article, and the less is its value; and vice versa, the less the productiveness of labour, the greater is the labour-time required for the production of an article, and the greater is its value. < . 2 .... There were two conditions to which an employment must be subject to cause it to be inspected, viz., the use of steam or water-power, and the manufacture of certain specified fibres." (Reports, &c, for 31st October, 1864, p. The hand-loom weavers, as a matter of fact, continued to require the same time as before; but for all that, the product of one hour of their labour represented after the change only half an hour's social labour, and consequently fell to one-half its former value. In time-wages, with few exceptions, the same wage holds for the same kind of work, whilst in piece-wages, though the price of the working-time is measured by a certain quantity of product, 1 "It is when work passes through several hands, each of which is to take its share of profits, while only the last does the work, that the pay which reaches the workwoman is miserably disproportioned." ("Child. Unlimited exploitation of cheap labour- power is the sole foundation of their power to compete. 1 Moreover, when once this fractional work is established as the exclusive function of one person, the methods it employs become perfected. It is apt to be forgotten that the magnitudes of different things can be com- pared quantitatively, only when those magnitudes are expressed in terms of the same unit. It will be remembered that on p. Piece-wage is, there- fore, only a modified form of time-wage. Although the splitting up of handicrafts lowers the cost of form- ing the workman, and thereby lowers his value, yet for the more difficult detail work, a longer apprenticeship is necessary, and, even where it would be superfluous, is jealously insisted upon by the workmen. . The capitalist has his own views of this ultima Thule, the necessary limit of the working-day. 15.) 1 It lies, of course, entirely beyond my purpose to take into considera- tion such details as the seigniorage on minting. l To show the condition of the labourers, I quote the following from the circumstantial report of a correspondent of the Morning Star, who, at the end of 1866, and beginning of 1867, visited the chief centres of distress: "In the East End districts of Poplar, Mill- wall, Greenwich, Deptford, Limehouse and Canning Town, at least 15,000 workmen and their families were in a state of utter destitution, and 3,000 skilled mechanics were breaking stones in the workhouse yard (after distress of over half a year's dura- tion) I had great difficulty in reaching the workhouse door, for a hungry crowd besieged it. On the other hand: Cotton-spinning and weaving: 1851, 371,777: 1861, 456,646. "He [the agricultural labourer] might say: 'I work hard, and have not enough to eat, and when in prison I did not work hard- er where I had plenty to eat, and therefore it is better for me to be in prison again than here.'" 4 From the tables appended to the first volume of the Report I have compiled the annexed com- parative summary. He treats it as a thing inherent in the capitalist mode of production, which mode, in his eyes, is the natural form of so- cial production. 267.) 168 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION must first be fulfilled. to 7— p. A pound of cotton wool, previously costing 50 cents to produce, in- cluded after that invention more unpaid labour, and was conse- quently sold with greater profit, at 10 cents. This is 1 Jerome had to wrestle hard, not only in his youth with the hodily flesh, as is shown by his fight in the desert with the handsome women of his imagination, but also in his old age with the spiritual flesh. Total Income . He is a zero in farm- ing calculations. The list of documents collected by this commission is to be seen in the catalogue of the "Twickenham Economic Museum." Very important are the official "Re- ports on Public Health." See also Eduard Reich, M. The remaining T^ths or 6s. 1866, p. Accumulation, therefore, presents itself on the one hand as increasing concentration of the means of production, and of the command over labour; on the other, as repulsion of many individual capitals one from another. If the labourer in consequence of increase of trade works 12 hours, the price of labour remaining the same, his daily wage now rises to 3 shillings 7-^-d. Cornm." afforded the press sen- sational copy always welcome. Nor on the other hand must it be supposed that even when the labourer is housed upon the lands which he cultivates, his household circumstances are gener- ally such as his life of productive industry would seem to deserve. The former plays an active, the latter a passive, part. c, p. 10d., 4s. Blase as Sir F. This person, well instructed in economy, resolved, on entering upon her govern- ment, to effect a radical cure, and to turn the whole country, whose population had already been, by earlier processes of the like kind, reduced to 15,000, into a sheep-walk. The same fate would have overtaken them in the commercial crisis that was staved off only by the cotton famine. 10.) "The higher wages, for getting adult males to work longer hours, are a temp- tation too strong to be resisted." ("Rept. Universal Money When money leaves the home sphere of circulation, it strips off the local garbs which it there assumes, of a standard of prices, of coin, of tokens, and of a symbol of value, and returns to its original form of bullion. In each of these phases 1 "Avec de l'argent on achete des marchandises et avec des marchan- dises on achete de l'argent." (Merrier de la Riviere: "L'ordre naturel et es- sentiel des societes politiques," p. 19. We see thus: In the first case, it is not the diminished rate either of the absolute, or of the propor- tional, increase in labour-power, or labouring population, which causes capital to be in excess, but conversely the excess of capital that makes exploitable labour-power insufficient. 106 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION another, the circulation of materialised social labour. 3 Before Eli Whitney invented the cotton gin in 1793, the separation of the seed from a pound of cotton cost an average day's labour. He, himself, re- marks that he had collected these figures a few years ago, and that since that time the size of the factories and the number of spin- dles per labourer in England has increased. Lond. ii., p. But each of these two changes of form is accomplished by an exchange between commodity and money, by their recip- rocal displacement. "The heathen were able, by the light of reason, to conclude that a usurer is a double-dyed* thief and murderer. G. The object of all development of the pro- ductiveness of labour, within the limits of capitalist production, is to shorten that part of the working-day, during which the work- man must labour for his own benefit, and by that very shortening, to lengthen the other part of the day, during which he is at liberty to work gratis for the capitalist. Although in all branches of industry that part of the con- stant capital consisting of instruments of labour must be sufficient for a certain number of labourers (determined by the magni- tude of the undertaking), it by no means always necessarily 1 G. His condition is not very different from that of the peasant. Neither the nature, nor the value of this material is of any importance. On the side of value, it is determined by the proportion in which it is divided into constant capital or value of the means of production, and variable capital or value of labour-power, the sum total of wages. You are altogether on the wrong track, if you think that he loses a single moment of his working- day, in reproducing or replacing the values of the cotton, the machinery, and so on. In country and town master and workmen stood close together socially. It was, on the contrary, the invention of machines that made a revolution in the form of steam-engines necessary. which is the true Riches of a Nation, and not the money." (John Bellers: "Proposals for Raising a Colledge of Industry." Lond. 2 The modern turbine frees the industrial exploitation of water-power from many of its former fetters. The possession of slaves brought them great gain, inasmuch as these, on account of their immunity from military service, could freely multiply and have a multitude of children. An example: The shirt factory of Messrs. If the wine gets time to mature— abstinence of the capitalist. .a crop of pota- toes. (See Workman's Advocate, January 13th, 1866.) The formation since the close of 1865 of a Trades' Union among the agricultural labourers at first in Scotland is a historic event. the proportion which the other kinds bear to it being easily ascertained." ("Outlines of Pol. In order that it may play the part of money, gold must of cours3 enter the market at some point or other. Employing surplus-value as capital, reconverting it into capital, is called accumulation of capital. MONEY, OR THE CIRCULAT ION OP COMMODITIES 99 A general rise in the prices of commodities can result only, either from a rise in their values— the value of money remaining constant— or from a fall in the value of money, the values of commodities remaining constant. On the other hand, however, our notion of productive labour becomes narrowed. The most important factor in this inquiry, is the composition of capital and the changes it undergoes in the course of the process of accumulation. 102 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION less they are its prices, for they are, in the first place, the form under which its value appears, i.e., money; and in the second place, the exponents of its exchange-ratio with money. This is the reason why it results COMMODITIES 59 in a product directly exchangeable with other commodities. The same exchange- value, i.e., the same quantity of incorporated social labour, re- mains throughout in the hands of the owner of the commodity, first in the shape of his own commodity, then in the form of the money for which he exchanged it, and lastly, in the shape of the commodity he buys with that money. 204.) 2 A. Non olet, from whatever source it may come. Suppose, e.g., a part of the West- phalian peasants, who, at the time of Frederick II., all span flax, forcibly expropriated and hunted from the soil; and the other part that remained, turned into day-labourers of large farmers. The Times answered the cotton lord as follows: "Mr. Edmund Potter is so impressed with the exceptional and supreme importance of the cotton masters that, in order to preserve this class and perpetuate their profession, he would keep half a million of the labouring class confined in a great moral workhouse against their will. But just as little as better clothing, food, and treatment, and a larger peculium, do away with the exploitation of the slave, so little do they set aside that of the wage-worker. For Modern Industry with its decennial cycles and periodic phases, which, moreover, as accumulation advances, are compli- cated by irregular oscillations following each other more and more quickly, that would indeed be a beautiful law, which pretends to make the action of capital dependent on the absolute variation of the population, instead of regulating the demand and supply of labour by the alternate expansion and contraction of capital, the labour-market now appearing relatively under-full, because cap- ital is expanding, now again over-full, because it is contracting. Malheureusement pour l'espece humaine, ce n'est qu'une ressource contre la misere et non un moyen de bien-etre. Hence an object may have a price without having value. Just as there is a certain proportion of farthings necessary in a small retail trade, to change silver money, and to even such reckonings as cannot be ad- justed with the smallest silver pieces.... Nevertheless, Ricardo himself pays so little attention to the two-fold character of the la- bour which has a two-fold embodiment, that he devotes the whole of his chapter on "Value and Riches, Their Distinctive Properties," to a laborious examination of the trivialities of a J. The lending out of these individually, independent- ly of the gang, is his second trade. What were once fens and sandbanks, bear now a luxuriant sea of corn and the highest of rents. These fe- males employed with the men, hardly distinguished from them in their dress, and begrimed with dirt and smoke, are exposed to the deterioration of char- acter, arising from the loss of self-respect, which can hardly fail to follow from their unfeminine occupation." (1. Newman, "Lectures on Political Economy." London, 1851, pp. . In the first phase or sale, the linen plays these two parts in its own person. Like every other increase in the productiveness of labour, machinery is intended to cheapen commodities, and, by shortening that portion of the working-day, in which the labourer works for himself, to lengthen the other portion that he gives, without an equivalent, to the capitalist. It should have compared the daily cost of such a negro with that of the free workman in the East-end of London. And as the greater part of society consists of such ne'er- do-wells, have I not rendered society incalculable service by my instruments of production, my cotton and my spindle, and not only society, but the labourer also, whom in addition I have pro- vided with the necessaries of life? COTTON Cotton yarn . The bounty of Nature does not explain why he would then have to work 6 days a week, or why he must furnish 5 days of surplus-labour. c. This is quite in accordance with the spirit of a language that likes to use a Teutonic word for the actual thing, and a Romance word for its reflexion. "An hundred houses and families have in some open field villages . . c, p. Newman: "Elements of Polit. I am the giant of Giant Castle, and have eat up all my neighbours." THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 693 well as in spring and summer, at those frequently recurring times when English agriculture, so careful and intensive, wants extra hands. 319, 320. c, bk. xlvi., n. de Lavergne, a blind admirer of England, is inclined to estimate the share of the capitalist too low, rather than too high. Lord Howard of Welden, English Plenipotentiary at Brus- sels, reports to the Foreign Office, May 12th, 1862: "M. As soon as one has made a privy, it is made use of by the whole neighbourhood. For a proper understanding of the division of labour in manu- facture, it is essential that the following points be firmly grasped. If the additional capital employs the person who produced it, this producer must not only continue to augment the value of the original capital, but must buy back the fruits of his previous la- bour with more labour than they cost When viewed as a transaction between the capitalist class and the working-class, it makes no difference that additional labourers are employed by means of the unpaid labour of the previously employed labourers. 674.) TIME-WAGES 549 man does the work of 1% or 2 men, the supply of labour increases, although the supply of labour-power on the market remains constant. In the following pages we shall assume that capital circulates in its normal way. to be labourers for hire; they . In the carding-room there has also been a great increase of labour. c, pp. The muscles of animals, when they are deprived of a proper amount of light, become soft and inelastic, the nervous power loses its tone from defective stimulation^ and the elaboration of all growth seems to be perverted... Only by suppressing the capitalist form of production could the length of the working-day be reduced to the necessary labour-time. This contradiction comes to light, as soon as by the general employment of machinery in a given industry, the value of the machine-produced commodity regulates the value of all commodities of the same sort; and it is this contradiction, that in its turn, drives the capitalist, without his being conscious of the fact, l to excessive lengthening of the working-day, in order that he may compensate the decrease in the relative number of labourers exploited, by an increase not only of the relative, but of the absolute surplus-labour. a. Com., V. Therefore the labour contained in the raw material and the instruments of labour can be treated just as if it were la- bour expended in an earlier stage of the spinning process, before the labour of actual spinning commenced. The num- ber of spindles and looms in 1856 was respectively 33,503,580 of the former, and 369,205 of the latter, which, reckoning the force of the nominal horse-power required to be the same as in 1850, would require a force equal to 175,000 horses, but the actual power given in the return for 1856 is 161, 435, less by above 10,000 horses than, calculating upon the basis of the return of 1850, the factories ought to have required in 1856." 3 "The facts thus brought out by the Return (of 1856) appear to be that the factory system is in- creasing rapidly; that although the same number of hands are employed in proportion to the horse-power as at former periods, there are fewer hands employed in proportion to the machinery; that the steam-engine is enabled to drive an increased weight of machinery by economy of force and other methods, and that an increased quantity of work can be turned off by improvements in machinery, and in methods of manufacture, by increase of speed of the machinery, and by a variety of other causes." 4 1 This was altered in the "Parliamentary Return" of 1862. Nevertheless, and exclusive of the terrible death-rate of children in the first years of their life, the official reports of Dr. Greenhow show the unfa- vourable health condition of the manufacturing districts as compared with "agricultural districts of normal health." As evidence, take the following table from his 1861 report: — ^J „_, a 3.S n 6° 3 -CT3 <• bo « 2<o <- o z<§ 5 S • <U W 3 v£~* Name of District. c, p. For instance, taking our former example, c=£410: suppose this sum to consist of £312 value of raw mate- rial, £44 value of auxiliary material, and £54 value of the machin- ery worn away in the process; and suppose that the total value of the machinery employed is £1,054. The converted form under which the daily, weekly, &c, value of labour-power presents itself, is hence that of time- wages, therefore day-wages, &c. Consequently, a part of the annual surplus- labour must have been applied to the production of additional means of production and subsistence, over and above the quantity of these things required to replace the capital advanced. m. Indeed, as regards the indoor operatives, the work which obtains the scanty pit- tance of food, is for the most part excessively prolonged. The reflux itself takes 1 "When a thing is bought in order to be sold again, the sum employed is called money advanced; when it is bought not to be sold, it may be said to be expended." — (James Steuart: "Works," &c. The girls stand round the stove, which throws out a terrific heat, and dries the cambrics rapidly for the ironers. But even in such case, the fall in the value of labour-power would cause a corre- sponding rise of surplus-value, and thus the abyss between the labourer's position and that of the capitalist would keep widening. Exclusion of money from circulation would also exclude absolutely its self-expansion as capital, while accumulation of a hoard in the shape of commodities would be sheer tomfoolery. Human machinery will rust under inaction, oil and rub it as you may. a day, where 500 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION a man at the rate of 2s. Here we find among other matters, a normal Belgian labourer's family, whose yearly income and ex- penditure he calculates on very exact data, and whose conditions of nourishment are then compared with those of the soldier, sail- or, and prisoner. Ill, p. Formerly gold was obtained almost exclusively by washing it out from gold-bearing alluvial deposits, products of the weathering of au- riferous rocks. Within certain limits therefore the supply of labour exploitable by capital is independent of the supply of labourers. ." (n. We shall at last force the secret of profit making. In England. To the latter, there- fore, the relations connecting the labour of one individual with that of the rest appear, not as direct social relations between individuals at work, but as what they really are, material rela- tions between persons and social relations between things. 1 With the national debt arose an international credit system, which often conceals one of the sources of primitive accumula- tion in this or that people. They must, therefore, mutually recognise in each other the rights of private proprietors. Between equal rights force decides. If the weekly wage, e.g., is 20s. c, pp. Yet we know by experience that a circulation of commodi- ties relatively primitive, suffices for the production of all these forms. 933 Total, . when these cases are brought forward. This law," adds Liebig, "was first enunciated by John Stuart Mill in his 'Principles of Pol. m., 15 At breakfast time, 10 At dinner time 20 Five days— 300 minutes, 60 On Saturday before 6 a. This in turn is the basis of an extended scale of produc- tion, of the methods for raising the productive power of labour that accompany it, and of accelerated production of surplus-value. Apres moi le deluge! is the watchword of every capitalist and of every capitalist nation. The many scattered customers, whom stray artisans until now had found in the numerous small producers working on their own account, concentrate themselves now into one great market 1 Mirabeau, 1. ... There are, therefore, methods of lowering the price of labour independent of the reduction of the nominal daily or weekly wages. In so far as they actually take the place of gold to the same amount, their movement is subject to the laws that regulate the currency of money itself. I think it is. 91. The employment of these different sorts of labour-power, an employment which is, in its turn, made necessary by the mode of production, makes a great difference in the cost of maintaining the family of the labourer, and in the value of the labour-power of the adult male. In the following table is cal- culated the decrease or increase for each separate year, as com- pared with its immediate predecessor. It avails him nothing, if he is so cunning as to import from Europe, with his own capital, his own wage- workers. Manufactures and commerce are the two parents of our national poor." Eden, like our Scotch republican on principle, errs only in this: not the abolition of villenage, but the abolition of the property of the agricultural labourer in the soil made him a proletarian, and eventually a pauper. The history of coinage during the middle ages and down into the 18th century, records the ever renewed confusion arising from this cause. 140 working-days remain. 57. Let us now accompany the owner of some commodity — say, our old friend the weaver of linen— to the scene of action, the market. We can neither see nor smell in this sum of money a trace of surplus-value. Ces maitres-artisans savent a peu pres combien d'ouvrage un com- pagnon-artisan peut faire par jour dans chaque metier, et les payent souvent a proportion de l'ouvrage qu'ils font; ainsi ces compagnons travaillent autant qu'ils peuvent, pour leur propre interet, sans autre inspection" (Cantillon, "Essai sur la Nature du Commerce en general," Amst. It would thus appear that even Greeks and Romans had some process of production, consequently, 82 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION To what extent some economists are misled by the Fetishism inherent in commodities, or by the objective appearance of the social characteristics of labour, is shown, amongst other ways, by the dull and tedious quarrel over the part played by Nature in the formation of exchange-value. Here, however, he comes to a stop, and gives up the further anal- ysis of the form of value. We know what were the conditions of their dwellings in 1846. Engels, "Umrisse zu einer Kritik der Nationalokonomie, in: Deutsch-Franzosische Jahrbiicher, herausgegeben von Arnold Ruge und Karl Marx." Paris, 1844, p. Si Ton gagnait longtemps en tout avec tous, il faudrait rendre de bon accord les plus grandes parties du profit pour recommencer le jeu." (Pinto: "Traite de la Circulation et du Credit." Amster- dam, 1771, p. In this there is nothing wonderful, for, says Adam Smith, "after these (profits) are diminished, stock may not only continue to increase, but to increase much faster than before. the division is not near so obvious." (A. 15, 39, 41. Further, the value of labour-power cannot fall, and conse- quently surplus-value cannot rise, without a rise in the produc- tiveness of labour. This share is directly proportional to the cheap- ness of the product. In the production of value a number of workmen rank merely as so many individual workmen; and it therefore makes no differ- ence in the value produced whether the 1,200 men work separately, or united under the control of one capitalist. 84, 85.) 2 Note to the third edition.— Subsequent very searching study of the primitive condition of man, led the author to the conclusion, that it was not the family that originally developed into the tribe, but that, on the con- trary, the tribe was the primitive and spontaneously developed form of human association, on the basis of blood relationship, and that out of the first incipient loosening of the tribal bonds, the many and various forms of the family were afterwards developed. Such a condition was al- ready supplied by the steam-engine. This was its method of primitive accumulation. Even in those few cases where full time was worked, and at the customary rate of piece-wage, the weekly wages of the operatives necessarily shrank, owing to good cotton being replaced by bad, Sea Island by Egyptian (in fine spinning mills), American and Egyptian by Surat, and pure cotton by mixings of waste and Surat. But the middle ages had handed down two distinct forms of capital, which mature in the most different economic social formations, and which, before the era of the capitalist mode of production, are considered as capi- tal quand meme — usurer's capital and merchant's capital. In Modern Industry man succeeded for the first time in making the product of his past labour work on a large scale gratuitously, like the forces of Nature. Eden in his "The State of the Poor, an History of the Labouring Classes in England," says, "the natural produce of our soil is certainly not fully adequate to our subsistence; we can neither be clothed, lodged nor fed but in consequence of some previous labour. But all this does not alter the fact, that it is the labourer's own labour, realised in a product, which is advanced to him by the capitalist. Therefore the great principle that the magnitude of a whole number, such as 10, is "regulated" by the number of times unity is contained in it, falls to the ground.— [The author explains in section 4 of this chapter, pp. Only when and where wage-labour is its basis does com- modity production impose itself upon society as a whole; but only then and there also does it unfold all its hidden potentialities. In course of time military and clerical digni- taries usurped, along with the common land, the labour spent upon it. His economic bondage 3 is both brought about and concealed by the periodic sale of 1 Parliament did not vote a single farthing in aid of emigration, but simply passed some Acts empowering the municipal corporations to keep the operatives in a half-starved state, i.e., to exploit them at less than the normal wages. c. If the productiveness of labour has, during the using up of these instruments of labour, increased (and it develops continually with the uninterrupted advance of science and technology), more efficient and (considering their increased efficiency), cheaper machines, tools, apparatus, &c, replace the old. 4 "Si le manouvrier libre prend un instant de repos, Peconomie sordide qui le suit des yeux avec inquietude, pretend qu'il la vole." N. Since the division of the day's work into necessary and surplus- labour differs in different countries, and even in the same country at different periods, or in different branches -of industry; and 1 See Paper read by Dr. Watson, Reporter on Products to the Govern- ment of India, before the Society of Arts, 17th April, 1860. The special advantages of this first period of fast and furious activity are felt in every branch of pro- duction that machinery invades. 58 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION expression of value, such as 20 yds. 2 1 We shall inquire, in another place, what circumstances in relation to productivity may modify this law for individual branches of industry. MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 485 changed by the printing machine. Therefore, with diminishing pro- ductiveness of labour and a simultaneous lengthening of the working-day, the absolute magnitude of surplus-value may continue unaltered, at the same time that its relative magnitude diminishes; its relative magnitude may continue unchanged, at the same time that its absolute magnitude increases; and, provided the lengthening of the day be sufficient, both may increase. p. Boston, 1836, Vol. In these cases, the time that ought to be taken by the process is prescribed, just as it is in herring fishing. This change 1 Tutti i fenomeni dell' universo, sieno essi prodotti della mano dell' uomo, ovvero delle universali leggi della fisica, non ci danno idea di attuale creazione, ma unicamente di una modi ficazi one della materia. The division of labour in the workshop implies con- centration of the means of production in the hands of one capitalist; the division of labour in society implies their dispersion among many independent producers of commodities. The Inquiry Commission of 1862 also proposed a new regu- lation of the mining industry, an industry distinguished from others by the exceptional characteristic that the interests of land- lord and capitalist there join hands. c, 80, p. The difference is s or a surplus-value of £90. c, p. The tenants have to make their own privies, the landlord only supplies a hole. c, p. It may be presented to the buyer. i., p. Bailey, the author of this anonymous work, a work which in its day created much stir in England, fancied that, by thus pointing out the various relative expressions of one and the same value, he had proved the impossibility of any determination of the. . there could not be a change of relative magnitude in the value of labour-power without a change in its absolute magnitude. There we were chiefly concerned with the social functioning of the labourer. They hurried at once to his house and assassinated him, to "abstain" from the payment of £21,875, the price of his treason. What is that equal something, that common substance, which admits of the value of the beds being expressed by a house? If we compare 1865 with 1864, there is a decrease in cereals of 246,667 qrs., of which 48,999 were wheat, 160,605 oats, 29,892 barley, &c: the decrease in potatoes was 446,398 tons, although the area of their cultivation increased in 1865. 13.) THE WORKING-DAY 237 er it be called corvee or wage-labour. 1 But, however that may be, it is clear, that the col- lective working-day of a large number of workmen simultaneously employed, divided by the number of these workmen, gives one day of average social labour. 469.) "The constant aim and the tendency of every improvement in machinery is, in fact, to do away entirely with the labour of man, or to lessen its price by substi- tuting the labour of women and children for that of grown-up men, or of un- skilled for that of skilled workmen." (Ure, 1. It 274 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION Still, during the greater part of the 18th century, up to the epoch of Modern Industry and machinism, capital in England had not succeeded in seizing for itself, by the payment of the weekly value of labour-power, the whole week of the labourer, with the exception, however, of the agricultural labourers. If the whole working-day were to shrink to the length of this portion, surplus-labour would vanish, a consummation utterly impossible under the regime of capital. . The Act of 1844 certainly prohibited the employment after 1 p. Meanwhile, we hang the small thieves... Their real change of value would appear from the diminished or increased quantity of com- modities produced in a given time. 544. The principle, carried out in the factory system, of analysing the process of production into its constituent phases, and of solving the problems thus proposed by the application of mechanics, of chemistry, and of the whole range of the natural sciences, becomes the determining principle everywhere. Ramsay: "An Essay on the Distribu- tion of Wealth." Edinburgh, 1836, p. In fact we started from exchange-value, or the exchange relation of com- modities, in order to get at the value that lies hidden behind it. are not trans- formed into capital, the basis of capitalist production vanishes. Those ancient social organisms of production are, as compared with bourgeois society, extremely simple and transparent. of Insp. The lot of the factory operatives will be best depicted by tak- ing a rapid survey of the course of the English cotton industry. The learned professor should not study the capitalist process of production in the nursery, nor under circum- stances where the principal personage, the capitalist, is wanting. 4 With Plato, division of labour within the community is a develop- ment from the multifarious requirements, and the limited capacities of indi- viduals. Alter 6 p. 430 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION people employed, * and the alterations caused by all these in the mode of conducting the wholesale trade. m. On these victims, consump- tion, which is purely a disease of baa air, feeds." Dr. Richardson: "Work and Over-work," in "Social Science Review," 18th July, 1863. First we will take the case of a spinning mill containing 10,000 mule spindles, spinning No. 32 yarn from American cotton, and producing 1 lb. * b. It is with the political economist as with the feudal jurist. He dis- covered that capital is not a thing, but a social relation between persons, established by the instrumentality of things. Here we have again the co-operation by di- vision of labour that characterises Manufacture; only now, it is a combination of detail machines. The val- 3 3 ue of this yarn is measured by 5^- working-hours, of which 4^- were, without any assistance from him, previously embodied in the means of production, in the cotton, the machinery, and so on; the remain- ing one hour alone is added by him. 97, 98.) , , 2 "Est-il question d'executer un travail complique, plusieurs choses doiveut etre faites simultanement. c, t. 1860.-204,141,168 Jbs. On leaving this sphere of simple circulation or of exchange of commodities, which furnishes the "Free-trader Vulgaris" with his views and ideas, and with the standard by which he judges a society based on capital and wages, we think we can perceive a change in the physiognomy of our dramatis persona?. M. VALUE OF LABOUR-POWER AND WAGES 541 which it differs from all other commodities, is beyond the cognn sance of the ordinary mind. of yarn. The value of his labour-power may vary, with the value of his usual means of subsistence, from 3 to 4 shillings, or from 3 to 2 shillings; or, if the value of his labour-power remains constant, its price may, in consequence of changing relations of de- mand and supply, rise to 4s. . From the children we may form an opinion as to the adults, especially the girls and women, and that in a branch of industry by the side of which cotton-spinning appears an agreeable and healthful occupation. Only a degree of intensity above the national average affects, in a given country, the measure of value by the mere duration of the working-time. Whether the combined work- ing-day, in a given case, acquires this increased productive power, because it heightens the mechanical force of labour, or extends its sphere of action over a greater space, or contracts the field of produc- tion relatively to the scale of production, or at the critical moment sets large masses of labour to work, or excites emulation between individuals and raises their animal spirits, or impresses on the sim- ilar operations carried on by a number of men the stamp of con- tinuity and many-sidedness, or performs simultaneously different operations, or economises the means of production by use in com- mon, or lends to individual labour the character of average social labour— whichever of these be the cause of the increase, the spe- cial productive power of the combined working-day is, under all circumstances, the social productive power of labour, or the produc- tive power of social labour. 1 In comparison with a handi- craft, productive power is gained, and this gain is owing to the general co-operative character of manufacture. I have another document sent to me in 1842, stating that the la- bour is progressively increasing — increasing not only because the distance to be travelled is greater, but because the quantity of goods produced is multiplied, while the hands are fewer in pro- portion than before; and, moreover, because an inferior species of cotton is now often spun, which it is more difficult to work . For instance, 10 lbs. Previously, the workman sold his own labour-power, which he disposed of nominally as a free agent. (2) Farms over 1, not over 5 acres. Comm. of cotton will absorb 12 hours' labour and be changed into 20 lbs. It amounts in the 3 different working-days respectively to 16j, 50 and 100 per 232 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION cent. Nor is the relation between the coat and the labour that produced it altered by the circumstance that tailoring may have become a special trade, an independent branch of the social division of labour. 34.) 568 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION by him. The substance linen becomes the vis- ible incarnation, the social chrysalis state of every kind of human labour. Modern Industry never looks upon and treats the existing form of a process as final. 15. Dr. Simon remarks that the mortality among the London tailors and printers between the ages of 25 and 35 is in fact much greater, be- cause the employers in London obtain from the country a great number of young people up to 30 years of age, as "apprentices" and "improvers," who come for the purpose of being perfected in their trade. The rela- tion of exchange subsisting between capitalist and labourer be- comes a mere semblance appertaining to the process of circulation, a mere form, foreign to the real nature of the transaction, and only mystifying it. The commissioner justly remarks that though as a rule machines take the place of men, here literally young persons replace machines. In the weaving-room, where a vast number of persons are employed, and principally females . — That was the prelude to the crisis which broke out immediately afterwards. 10 y d. Petty: "Quantulumcunque " p. Here, by comparison of the statistics of the individual provinces, and of the individual counties in each province, he proves that the misery there is not, as Malthus would have it, in proportion to the number of the popula- tion, but in inverse ratio to this. The money capital formed by means of usury and commerce was prevented from turning into industrial capital, in the country by the feudal constitution, in the towns by the guild organisation. 141.) [Added in the 4th German edition. 12. 294. Children of nine or ten years are dragged from their squalid beds at two, three, or four o'clock in the morning and compelled to work for a bare subsistence until ten, eleven, or twelve at night, their limbs 1 1. Evidence, notes 479, 359, 27. 18. When the steam-engine transplanted the factories from the country waterfalls to the middle of towns, the "abstemious" surplus-val- ue maker found the child-material ready to his hand, without being forced to seek slaves from the workhouses. This fall is due, besides other causes, to the increase in lighting by gas. What B claims, and has a right to claim, is that the capitalist should pay him the value of his labour-power. The total cost of administering the Acts in England, Scotland, and Ireland amounted for the year 1871-72 to no more than £25,347, inclu- sive of the law expenses incurred by prosecutions of offending masters. The total number of persons of both sexes and of all ages from 3 years upwards, em- ployed in stocking making in England, was in 1862 about 129,000. If the labour be prolonged 1, 3, or 6 hours beyond A B, we have 3 other lines: Working-day I. Let its value-product be 6 shillings, that of one hour's labour therefore 6d. G. Little as Vulgar-Economy knows about the nature of value, yet whenever it wishes to consider the phenomena of circulation in their purity, it assumes that supply and demand are equal, which amounts to this, that their effect is nil. whenever ... Bedroom: 8 ft. more refined press confined itself to reflections on the coarse degradation of the agricultural population who are capable of selling their children into such slavery! Under the accursed conditions to which these "delicate" people condemn the agricultural labourer, it would not be surprising if he ate his own children. When the labourer co-operates systematically with others, he strips off the fetters of his individuality, and develops the ca- pabilities of his species. We know, moreover, that this reduction is no mere scientific process. Oekonomie, 1859." In the estimation of that paper, my view that each special mode of production and the social relations corresponding to it, in short, that the economic structure of society, is the real basis on which the juridical and political superstructure is raised, and to which definite social forms of thought cor- respond; that the mode of production determines the character of the social, political, and intellectual life generally, all this is very true for our own times, in which material interests preponderate, but not for the middle ages, in which Catholicism, nor for Athens and Rome, where politics, reigned supreme. 2 Malthus, "Inquiry into the Nature and Progress of Rent," Lond., 1815. In reference to this relation of de- pendence, Sir F. "Either," says Dr. Hunter, "the whole proceeding will of necessity stop as an ab- surdity, or the public compassion (!) be effectually aroused to the obligation which may now be without exaggeration called na- tional, of supplying cover to those who by reason of their having no capital, cannot provide it for themselves, though they can by periodical payments reward those who will provide it for them." 3 Admire this capitalistic justice! The owner of land, of houses, the businessman, when expropriated by "improvements" such as railroads, the building of new streets, &c, not only receives full indemnity. c, p. Before the exchange we had £40 worth of wine in the hands of A, and £50 worth of corn in those of B, a total value of £90. of Insp. 3., n. 897.) 3 "Chaque vendeur ne peut done parvenir a rencherir habituellement ses marchandises, qu'en se soumettant aussi a payer habituellement plus cher les marchandises des autres vendeurs; et par la meme raison, chaque consommateur ne peut payer habituellement moins cher ce qu'il achete, qu'en se soumettant aussi a une diminution semblable sur le prix des choses qu'il vend." (Merrier de la Riviere, 1. But an act of Parliament of the same date (an act to amend the criminal law relating to violence, threats, and molestation), re-established, in point of fact, the former state of things in a new shape. x In the 10 years from 1856 to 1866, England exported to India and China £120,000,000 in silver, which had been re- ceived in exchange for Australian gold. Comm. 2 It is only the shorten- ing of the labour-time, necessary for the production of a definite quantity of commodities, that is aimed at. It is the same here ;with the housing 1 I. From that moment new forces and new passions spring up in the bosom of society; but the old social organ- isation fetters them and keeps them down. 6d., and notwithstand- ing this, many of them said they would rather work 10 hours." 1. Only one of the houses investigated had 2 bedrooms. 1 It is thus, that for the first time, this value shows itself in its true light as a congelation of un- differentiated human labour. 3 Nevertheless, whether money serves as a means of 1 "All labour is paid after it has ceased." ("An Inquiry into those Prin- ciples Respecting the Nature of Demand," &c, p. It is accordingly a maxim of slave management, in slave-importing countries, that the most effective economy is that which takes out of the human chattel in the shortest space of time the utmost amount of exertion it is capable of putting forth. extended the laws against coali- tions of labourers to manufactures. . Only five J 1. We must not let ourselves be misled by the circumstance that the cotton has taken a new shape while the substance of the spindle has to a certain extent been used up. materials supplied by Nature, in that case, there would be no constant capital to transfer to the product. t.i., pp. c, p. P. Sanderson have something else to make besides steel. The cottages gener- ally crouch under some bank, or often in a ravine or quarry, and none but the smallest sheep and native cattle can live on the pastures.... The family "must either go to the allotment to deposit their ordures," or, as happens in this place, saving your 690 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION presence, "use a closet with a trough set like a drawer in a chest of drawers, and drawn out weekly and conveyed to the allotment to be emptied where its contents were wanted." In Japan, the cir- cle of life-conditions moves more decently than this. . ch. 472 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION ing, shoemaking, sewing, hat-making, and many others, is the sewing-machine. It is in tropical cul- ture, where annual profits often equal the whole capital of planta- tions, that negro life is most recklessly sacrificed. a week, minus a rent of £4 a year ... Useful labour becomes, therefore, a more or less abundant source of products, in proportion to the rise or fall of its productiveness. One and the same commodity, the linen, opens the series of its own metamorphoses, and completes the metamorphosis of another (the wheat). "The most wholesome mixtures of flour having been refused (by the English agricultural labourer) ... That, consequently, this capital falls out of employment so soon as they commence their forced holi- days, and never rests till it has found a fresh investment, where it can again be productively consumed by these same 50 men. of that island: "The His- tory of Java," Lond., 1817. At their birth the great banks, decorated with national ti- tles, were only associations of private speculators, who placed themselves by the side of governments, and, thanks to the privileges they received, were in a position to advance money to the State. 274, 275. 58.) "When the labourers receive wages for their labour ... Paper money is a token representing gold or money. Man is bartered for a fleece or a carcase of mutton, nay, held cheaper .... Trees are rare, except in sheltered places, and where not protected, are blown out of all shape. . Red- grave, factory inspector, illustrates this by a comparative review of the 20 years from 1839-1859, according to which wages rose in the factories under the 10 hours' law, whilst they fell in the facto- ries in which the work lasted 14 to 15 hours daily. * The weight of metal in the silver and copper tokens is arbi- trarily fixed by law. How that originated we know perfectly well. is that on which he is most to rely for the repayment of his capital. . If the merchant were made to pay the price of the coinage, he would not have sent his silver to the Tower without consideration; and coined money would always keep a value above uncoined silver." (North, 1. ac- cording to the season of the year, or the amount and nature of their master's business; while others are again engaged in the bakehouse in 'bringing out' more batches until late in the afternoon. With regard to the money spent, the new value is merely a reproduction; but, nevertheless, it is an actual, and not, as in the case of the value of the means of production, only an apparent, reproduction. As it excludes the concentration of these 762 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION means of production, so also it excludes co-operation, divi- sion of labour within each separate process of produc- tion, the control over, and the productive application of the forces of Nature by society, and the free develop- ment of the social productive powers. Torrens. of yarn indicate the absorption of 6 hours' labour. Let us now consider the total value of the product, the 10 lbs. In 1861, the number of females employed in these industries, in England and Wales, amounted to 586,299, of these 115,242 at the least were under 20, and 16,650 under 15 years of age. There can be no greater error than in supposing that capital is increased by non-consumption." 4 There can be no greater error than that which Ricardo and all subsequent economists repeat after A. In every industry, each individual labourer, be he Peter or Paul, differs from the average labourer. It dates from the last third of the 17th century, and the first attempt to put it in practice on a national scale was made a century afterwards, during the French bourgeois revolution. 220 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION One more example. 1833, p. It is a thick folio volume in which the Report itself occupies only five lines to this effect; that the committee has nothing to say, and that more witnesses must be examined! The mode of examining the witnesses reminds one of the cross-examination of witnesses in English courts of justice, where the advocate tries, by means of impudent, unexpected, equivocal and involved questions, put without connexion, to intimidate, surprise, and confound the witness, and to give a forced meaning to the answers extorted from him. c. Means of Payment In the simple form of the circulation of commodities hitherto considered, we found a given value always presented to us in a double shape, as a commodity at one pole, as money at the oppo- site pole. It is otherwise with the instruments of labour. The more or less extensive application of division of labour depends on length of purse, not on greatness of genius. (1. He then asked for what he had made over and above the 78 hours per week, but was refused. They may vary either in the same or in different degrees, in the same or in opposite 1 "The amount of labour which a man had undergone in the course of 24 hours might be approximately arrived at by an examination of the chemi- cal changes which had taken place in his body, changed forms in matter indi- cating the anterior exercise of dynamic force." (Grove: "On the Correlation of Physical Forces.") 528 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION directions, with the result that the variations counteract one another, either wholly or in part. 2 The reader will notice, that the word revenue is used in a double sense: first, to designate surplus-value so far as it is the fruit periodically yield- ed by capital; secondly, to designate the part of that fruit which is period- ically consumed by the capitalist, or added to the fund that supplies his private consumption I have retained this double meaning because it har- monises with the language of the English and French economists. Regularly in autumn and winter women and "young persons," the wives, sons, and daugh- ters of the neighbouring small farmers, a class of people totally unaccustomed to machinery, are taken from field labour to feed the rollers of the scutching mills with flax. Although existing only in the promise of the buyer to pay, it causes the commodity to change hands. Since the surplus-value = £90, and the advanced capital = £500, we should, according to the usual way of reckoning, get as the rate of surplus-value (generally confounded with rate of profits) 18%, a rate so low as possibly to cause a pleasant sur- prise to Mr. Carey and other harmonisers. Thus do the children enjoy life till the age of 12 or 14. Harrup also appointed a boy to announce the starting time by a whistle, which he often did before six o'clock in the morning: and if the hands were not all there at the moment the whistle ceased, the doors were closed, and those hands who were outside were fined: and as there was no clock on the premises, the unfortunate hands were at the mercy of the young Harrup-inspired time-keeper. The two things compared are, the value of the product and the value of its constituents consumed in the process of pro- duction. His answer would simply have been: — Gentlemen! 1 Senior, 1. Now, whether such a machine be merely a reproduc- tion of a complicated manual implement, or a combination of various simple implements specialised by Manufacture, in either case, in the factory, i.e., in the workshop in which machin- ery alone is used, we meet again with simple co-operation; and, leaving the workman out of consideration for the moment, this cp-operation presents itself to us, in the first instance, as the conglomeration in one place of similar and simultaneously acting machines. Anyhow, whether the coat be worn by the tailor or by his customer, in either case it operates as a use-value. 2 By constantly making a part of the hands "supernumerary," mod- ern industry, in all countries where it has taken root, gives a spur to emigration and to the colonisation of foreign lands, which are thereby converted into settlements for growing the raw material of the mother country; just as Australia, for example, was converted into a colony for growing wool. The farmer complains ... If the population increases, a new commu- nity is founded, on the pattern of the old one, on unoccupied land. per acre to the clansmen, who for centuries had shed their blood for her family. 717.) "Are they very anx- ious to see the law enforced?" "The majority are." (n. And again and again it has been pointed out that, notwithstanding the many salubri- ous influences which there are in country life, the crowding which so favours the extension of contagious disease, also favours the origination of disease which is not contagious. 1865.," pp 498-502, passim. 1 We see then, that, apart from extremely elastic bounds, the nature of the exchange of commodities itself imposes no limit to the working-day, no limit to surplus-labour. Engels in his "Lage der Arbeitenden Klasse Englands," and other writers, that I need only mention the subject in this place. In England the culti- vation of green crops increases with the breeding of cattle; in Ireland, it decreases. "The supply of labour is always, not only small, but uncertain." x "Though the produce divided between the capitalist and the labourer be large, the labourer takes so great a share that he soon becomes a capitalist. 'The result of this change is not only that the class of town people is enormously increased, but the old close- packed little towns are now centres, built round on every side, open nowhere to air, and being no longer agreeable to the rich are abandoned by them for the pleasanter outskirts. In our own times, the slight and transient fall in the value of gold compared with silver, which was a consequence of the Indo-Chinese demand for silver, produced on a far more extended scale in France the same phenomena, export of silver, and its expulsion from circulation by gold. Cooksley are subject to the disadvantage of having their boys enticed to continue their labour elsewhere after 6 p. In other words, the value of a commodity obtains independent and definite expression, by taking the form of exchange-value. Vanderlint, 1. (Epi- tomised in part by Carey in "The Slave Trade." Philadelphia, 1853, pp. They are merely buyers or sellers. . 18G4, p. NATIONAL DIFFERENCES OF WAGES 563 In an "Essay on the Rate of Wages," l one of his first economic writings, H. I borrow my examples chiefly from the Free-trade period after 1848, that age of paradise, of which the commercial travellers for the great firm of Free-trade, blatant as ignorant, tell such fabulous tales. In the preparation of these, it is added, scarcely a single article had been purchased, except the awl, needle, thimble, and a very few parts of the iron-work employed in the weaving. Meanwhile, the wealthier manufacturers, who combined spinning with weaving, used the diminution of production resulting from this agreement, to extend their own business and thus to make great profits at the expense of the small employers. 1 The dogma was used by Bentham himself, as well as by Malthus, James Mill, MacCulloch, etc., for an apologet- ic purpose, and especially in order to represent one part of capi- tal, namely, variable capital, or that part convertible into la- bour-power, as a fixed magnitude. They react at the same time on that part of the original capital which has entered upon its stage of renewal. 2 As to raw material, 3 there is not the least doubt that the rapid strides of cotton spinning, not only pushed on with tropical luxuriance the growth of cotton 1 According to the census of 1861 (Vol. On the other hand, no change in this productiveness affects the labour represented by value. Silver is seldom found native; however it occurs in special quartz that is separated from the lode with comparative ease and contains mostly 40-90% silver; or it is contained, in smaller quantities, in copper, lead and other ores which in themselves are worthwhile working. Such a thing, in truth, cannot exist, says Aristotle. 1715, 1717.) "Do you think that the women employed about the collieries are less moral than the women employed in the factories?" ". The life- time of an instrument of labour, therefore, is spent in the repeti- tion of a greater or less number of similar operations. of Fact.," 31st October, 1856, p. "In the existing condition of the trade (the time of the cotton famine), it was greatly to the advantage of the operatives to work 12 hours per day, and make wages when they could." A bill to this effect had been brought in, "and it was mainly due to the action of the oper- ative bleachers in Scotland that the bill was abandoned " (Reports, &c, for 31st October, 1862, pp. In many of these woods the fox, the wild cat, the marten, the pole- cat, the weasel and the Alpine hare are common; whilst the rabbit, the squir- rel and the rat have lately made their way into the country. A young wife, two pretty children, a cluster of pawn-tickets, and a bare room were all he had to show." On the after pains of the crisis of 1866, the following extract from a Tory newspaper. All colliers are bound ['bound,' an expression which, like bondage, dates from the age of serf- dom] to the colliery lessee or owner for twelve months If the colliers express discontent, or in any way annoy the 'viewer,' a mark of memorandum is made against their names, and, at the annual 'binding,' such men are turned off It appears to me that no part of the 'truck system' could be worse than what obtains in these densely-populated districts. m. The English "ateliers na- tionaux" ofl862 and the following years, established for the benefit of the des- titute cotton operatives, differ from the French of 1848 in this, that in the latter the workmen had to do unproductive work at the expense of the state, in the former they had to do productive municipal work to the advantage of the bourgeois, and that, too, cheaper than the regular workmen, with whom they were thus thrown into competition. 748 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION provided for by industrial capital. With the growth of the total capital, its variable constituent or the labour incorporated in it, also does increase, but in a constantly diminishing proportion. Hence, in order to keep the in- creased number of mechanics in constant employment, one carpet manufacturer after another must displace workmen by machines. it [the Poor Law] tends to destroy the harmony and beauty, the symmetry and order of that system which God and Nature have established in the world." x If the Venetian monk found in the fatal destiny that makes misery eternal, the raison d'etre of Christian charity, celibacy, monasteries and holy houses, the Protestant prebendary finds in it a pretext for condemning the laws in virtue of which the poor possessed a right to a miserable public relief. of Pol. Les impots directs, les corvees, les servitudes de tout genre, ecrasent le cultivateur allemand, qui paie encore des impots indirects dans tout ce qu'il achete.... 19) DIVISION OF LABOUR AND MANUFACTURE 351 and the social division of labour, which forms the foundation of all production of commodities. It is the great merit of E. Ann Killin. (8) Total area. From the middle of the 16th century the peasants of Eastern Prussia, Brandenburg, Pomerania, and Silesia, and soon after the free peasants of Schleswig- Holstein were degraded to the condition of serfs. Apart from natural exhaustion through age, &c, I must be able on the morrow to work with the same normal amount of force, health and freshness as to-day. In order to examine the object of our investi- gation in its integrity, free from all disturbing subsidiary circumstances, we must treat the whole world as one nation, and assume that capitalist production is everywhere established and has possessed itself of every branch of industry. Along with the progress in the productiveness of labour, that small portion of society increases both absolutely and relatively. 2 In the Coventry silk weav- ing industry the experiment of "cottage factories" was tried. The sons ol farmers make up a great part ol them. This increase is effected by the simple process that constantly "sets free" a part of the labourers; by methods which lessen the number of labourers employed in proportion to the increased production. M. J. idling part of the time, slaving the rest." (1. A variation in the productiveness of labour, its increase or diminution, causes a variation in the opposite direction in the value of labour-power, and in the same direction in surplus-value. There remain 3 half- hours, which yield 3/23X^1 15,000=^15,000 or the gross profit. If we make abstraction from its use-value, we make abstraction at the same time from the material elements and shapes that make the product a use-value; we see in it no longer a table, a house, yarn, or any other useful thing. E.] 3 "Machinery and labour are in constant competition." Ricardo, I. . 5, 6.) Ft is Thunen's merit to have asked this question. Let him therefore console himself with the reflection that virtue is its own reward. m. But as an actor during the whole course of the play be- longs to the stage, so the operatives, during 15 hours, belonged to the factory, without reckoning the time for going and coming. When, in 1871, Parliament withdrew from them this power, in order to confer it on the Factory Inspectors, to whose province it thus added by a single stroke more than one hundred thousand workshops, and three hundred brickworks, care was taken at the same time not to add more than eight assistants to their already undermanned staff. . "For this the legislature is alone to blame, by having passed a delusive law, which, while it would seem to provide that the children employed in factories shall be educated, contains no enactment by which that professed end can be secured. But in return, his unpaid forced labour for the lord, on its side, never acquires the character of voluntary paid labour. II n'y a pour eux que deux sortes d'institutions, celles de l'art et celles de la nature. "The quantity of land assigned (in the old laws) would now be judged too great for labourers, and rather as likely to con- vert them into small farmers." (George Roberts: "The Social History of the People of the Southern Counties of England in Past Centuries." Lond., 1856, pp. Scrofula attacking the glands, or bones, or other parts of the body, is a disease of two-thirds or more of the potters That the 'degenerescence' of the population of this district is not even greater than it is, is due to the constant recruiting from the adjacent country, and intermarriages with more healthy races." 3 1 Children's Employment Commission. 3,051,343 (5) Farms over 30, not over 50 acre3. The Emperor Charles VI., on 9th Feb., 1719, renewed the edict of r685, and not till 1765 was its use openly allowed in the Electorate of Saxony. * There is this to boot, that the same individual can do certain kinds of work just as well on a large as on a small scale; for instance, the labour of superintendence, the carriage of the fractional product from one stage to the next, &c. . valeur per- manente, multipliante." (Sismondi: "Nouveaux Principes d'Econ. Both part with goods that, as use-values, are of no service to them, and receive others that they can make use of. 2 Factory legislation for the first time went beyond its original sphere in the "Printworks' Act of 1845." The displeasure with which capital received this new "extravagance" speaks through every line of the Act. (What mealy-mouthed phraseology!) Labour is scarce here, and might fall short if there were such a regulation." (i.e., Ellis Brown & Go. might fall into the fatal perplexity of being obliged to pay. Seventh Report," 1865, p. Modern Industry rent the veil that concealed from men their own social process of pro- duction, and that turned the various, spontaneously divided branches of production into so many riddles, not only to outsid- ers, but even to the initiated. A part of the price of the com- modity consists of the price of labour. Cazenove, p. Their weekly wages are about 12s., and although it may be as- sumed that a man earns on piece-work under the greater stimulus to labour, Is. or perhaps 2s. 64.) 4 This circumstance is mentioned only for the sake ol completeness, for I shall not consider the rate of profit, i.e., the ratio of the surplus-value to the total capital advanced, until I come to the third book. But, if the hands remain in a factory aft- er the machinery has ceased to revolve . There are landlords who deem any stye good enough for their labourer and his family, and who yet do not disdain to drive with him the hardest possible bar- gain for rent. We must still pause a moment on this element of primitive accumulation. To fix its price, it suffices to equate it to gold in imagination. Not only have we here an increase in the productive power of the individual, by means of co-operation, but the creation of a new power, namely, the collective power of masses. Surplus-value arises from variable capital alone, and we saw that the amount of surplus-value depends on two factors, viz., the rate of surplus-value and the number of the workmen simultaneously employed. Such people may get the notion into their heads, that our spinner, for example 224 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION produces or replaces in the first 8 hours of his working-day the value of the cotton; in the following hour and 36 minutes the value of the instruments of labour worn away; in the next hour and 12 min- utes the value of the wages; and that he devotes to the production of surplus-value for the manufacturer, only that well known "last hour." In this way the poor spinner is made to perform the two-fold miracle not only of producing cotton, spindles, steam-engine, coal, oil, &c, at the same time that he spins with them, but also of turning one working-day into five; for, in the example we are considering, the production of the raw material and in- struments of labour demands four working-days of twelve hours each, and their conversion into yarn requires another such day. l Of course, the composition of this tribunal was in itself a violation of the law. The living machinery, on the contrary, gets better the longer it lasts, and in proportion as the skill, handed from one generation to another, accumulates. In Fingringhoe, a parish of 3,443 acres, were in 1851, 145 houses; in 1861, only 110. m., and get three hours of it (for meals and rest). 124. Increase in the size of the machine, and in the number of its working tools, calls for a more massive mechanism to drive it; and this mechanism requires, in order to overcome its resistance, a mightier moving power than that of man, apart from the fact that man is a very imperfect instrument for producing uniform continued motion. The exportation of the coin is caused by its cheapness, and is not the effect, but the cause of an unfavourable balance," already occurs in Barbon: "The Bal- ance of Trade, if there be one, is not the cause of sending away the money out of a nation; but that proceeds from the difference of the value of bullion in every country." (N. The serf was emanci- pated in that country before he had acquired any prescriptive right to the soil. Accordingly, in France alone, in the first half of the 18th century, over 100 different kinds of silk stuffs were woven, and, in Avig- non, it was law, that "every apprentice should devote himself tr> only one sort of fabrication, and should not learn the preparation of several kinds of stuff at once." The territorial division of la- bour, which confines special branches of production to special dis- tricts of a country, acquires fresh stimulus from the manufactur- ing system, which exploits every special advantage. 3 "La valeur consiste dans le rapport d'echange qui se trouve entre telle chose et telle autre, entre telle mesure d'une production, et telle mesure d'une autre." (Le Trosne: "De l'lnteret Social." Physiocrates. But in actual practice, the process does not retain its normal form. The value so advanced has not expanded, no surplus-value has been created, and consequently money has not been converted into capital. 2 Bacon shows the connexion between a free, well-to-do peasantry and good infantry. . x But this utility is not a thing of air. It was computed that the number of persons who tilled their own land was greater than the number of those who farmed the land of others." Macaulay: "History of England," 10th ed., 1854, I. 180.) For the "labour question" in English agricultural districts, differently from the rest of the civilised world, means the landlords' and farm- ers' question, viz., how it is possible, despite an always increasing exodus of the agricultural folk, to keep up a sufficient relative surplus-population in the country, and by means of it keep the wages of the agricultural labourer at a minimum? 2 1 "'EXiuCouot)? Their earnings accordingly rose. Temples with the ancients served as the dwellings of the gods of commodi- ties. 5 3 8 " 12. Of course, this petty mode of production exists also under slavery, serfdom, and other states of dependence. 166.) 2 "The inventor of the spinning machine has ruined India, a fact, how- ever, that touches us but little." A. . This saving in labour was carried still fur- ther in 1865, by the employment of steam power. The economy in their application is entirely owing to their being consumed in common by a large number of workmen. No doubt, the capitalist can, instead of five shillings, pay the labourer four shil- lings and sixpence or even less. In the outside department of the factory, of the manu- factory, and of the warehouse, the so-called domestic workers, whose employment is at the best irregular, are entirely dependent for their raw material and their orders on the caprice of the cap- italist, who, in this industry, is not hampered by any regard for depreciation of his buildings and machinery, and risks nothing by a stoppage of work, but the skin of the worker himself. Except as personified capital, the capitalist has no historical value, and no right to that historical existence, which, to use an expression of the witty Lichnowsky, "hasn't got no date." And so far only is the necessity for his own transitory existence implied in the transitory necessity for the capitalist mode of production. 2 1. (Adam Smith, Book I., chapter 8.) So far, we have only considered one special phase of this process, that in which the increase of capital occurs along with a constant technical com- position of capital. ... Their emigration was prevented. de Forbonnais: "Elements du Commerce, Nouv. 8, c.) Further facts on this subject will be given later. It was necessary to conjure up in the twinkling of an eye the gorgeous dresses for the noble ladies bidden to the ball in honour of the newly-imported Princess of Wales. What has this been owing to? Piece-wages therefore lay the foundation of the modern "domestic labour," described above, as well as of a hierarchically organised system of exploitation and oppression. We assumed, on the occasion of its sale, that the value of a day's labour-power is three shillings, and that six hours' labour is incorporated in that sum; and consequently that this amount of labour is requisite to produce the necessaries of life daily re- quired on an average by the labourer. un- der 12, and after March 1st, 1836, no child under 13, was to work more than eight hours in a factory. And will not own that he has done it, and thinks no one will find him out, because the oxen, drawn back- wards into his den, make it seem, from their foot-prints, that they have been let out. c, p. 19.) "The farmer now absurdly asserts, that he keeps the poor. have but to resolve that there shall be no labourers' dwellings on their estates, and their estates will thenceforth be virtually free from half their respon- sibility for the poor. This sum of £90 or s expresses the absolute 1 What Lucretius says is self-evident; "nil posse creari de nihilo," out of nothing, nothing can be created. To be the universal equivalent, becomes, by this social process, the specific function of the commodity thus excluded by the rest. 474 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION machines. Every master may put an iron ring round the neck, arms or legs of his slave, by which to know him more easily and to be more certain of him. By the beginning of the 18th century the Dutch manufactures were far outstripped. So far as the labour-statutes aim at compulsory extension of the working-day, I do not return to them, as this point was treated earlier (Chap. 1 The exploitation of cheap and immature labour-power is carried out in a more shameless manner in modern Manufacture than in the factory proper. 55, 56; p. Modern agriculture dates in England from the middle of the 18th century, although the revolution in landed property, from which the changed mode of production starts as a basis, has a much earlier date. If a working-day of 12 hours be embodied in six shillings, 1,200 such days will be embodied in 1,200 times 6 shillings. It thus serves as a universal measure of value. But in proportion, as the export of cotton became of vital inter- est to these states, the over-working of the negro and some- times the using up of his life in 7 years of labour became a fac- tor in a calculated and calculating system. These incomes liable to taxation in England, Wales and Scotland, amounted in 1864 to £95,844,222, in 1865 to £105,435, 5'79. the de- manding higher wages, because labour is abbreviated, is in other words the endeavour to establish a duty on mechanical improvements." ("On Combination of Trades," new ed., London, 1834, p. In tailoring, shirtmaking, shoemaking, &c, all the forms are intermingled. When looked at as crystals of this social substance, common to them all, they are — Values. And in addi- tion a willing help at the festive board? Once a function of capital, it acquires special characteristics. COMMODITIES 41 to produce the latter, he must not only produce use-values, but use-values for others, social use-values. Yet they are produced without capital, machinery, division of la- bour, or any of those means which give such facilities to the manu- facturing interest of Europe. This circumstance depends, neither on the will of the wheat producer, nor on that of the owners of other commodities. Apart from all other circumstances, this event alone was sufficient to give a great impulse to the turning of Irish arable into pasture land, to the concentration of farms, and to the eviction of small cultivators. ! Each use-value disappears, but only to re-appear under a new form in a new use-value. Those where a very large number of labourers work, each separately and on his own account, are hardly considered; they are placed at an infinite distance from the others. Even the very youngest children work with a strained attention and a rapidity that is astonishing, hardly ever giving their fingers rest or slowering their motion. 9.) 6 "Ch. Empl. If, now, the working- 1 "There are compensating circumstances ... So soon as this point is at last reached — and it takes many years — the hour has struck for the introduction of machinery, and for the thenceforth rapid con- version of the scattered domestic industries and also of manufac- tures into factory industries. Let us now consider a little more closely the characteristic peculiarities of piece-wages. Vol. 1865 £. By the general law of value, if the value of 40 lbs. THE ENGLISH FACTORY ACTS, 1833 TO 1864 After capital had taken centuries in extending the working- day to its normal maximum limit, and then beyond this to the limit of the natural day of 12 hours, 1 there followed on the birth of machinism and modern industry in the last third of the 18th century, a violent encroachment like that of an avalanche in its intensity and extent. Jxxiii., n. Commodities alone are money. 2 The use of machinery for the exclusive purpose of cheapen- ing the product, is limited in this way, that less labour must be expended in producing the machinery than is displaced by the employment of that machinery. 3 As to any further reduc- tion of his income, he may say, nihil habeo nihil euro. 7, 52, 53. This shows that the two properties of labour, by virtue of which it is enabled in one case to preserve value, and in the other to create value, are essentially different. London printers. And the proportion of circulating capital is a hundred or thousand times less ... Custodi, Parte Moderna, t. The control exercised by the capitalist is not only a spe- cial function, due to the nature of the social labour-process, and peculiar to that process, but it is, at the same time, a function of the exploitation of a social labour-process, and is consequently rooted in the unavoidable antagonism between the exploiter and the living and labouring raw material he exploits. This separation begins in simple co-operation, where the capitalist represents to the single workman, the oneness and the will of the as- sociated labour. This same Mr. Watts earlier traded in Owenism and published in 1842 another pamphlet: "Facts and Fictions of Political Economists," in which among other things he declares that "prop- erty is robbery." That is long ago. Every such expression tells us, that what appears in the use-values, coat, corn, &c, is the value of the linen. The question is, whether we both exchange something superfluous for something necessary." 3 We see in this passage, how Condillac not only confuses use-value with exchange-value, but in a really childish manner assumes, that in a society, in which the production of commodities is well developed, each producer produces his own means of subsistence, and throws into* circulation only the excess over his own requirements. It may, of course, happen that A and B make simultaneous purchases, the one from the oth- er; but such exceptional transactions are by no means the neces- sary result of the general conditions of the circulation of commodi- ties. The consequences of this are various. Economy in the use of the means of production has to be con- sidered under two aspects. of cotton, together with one-fourth of a spindle. c, pp. But in every improved and civilised society, this is the state into which the labouring poor, that is, the great body of the people, must necessarily fall." 8 For preventing the complete deterioration of the great mass of the people by division of labour, A. This fall in value would express itself in a still greater fall in price if the price of silver were not pegged even to-day by artificial means. . 2 Countries in which the bourgeois form of production is de- veloped to a certain extent, limit the hoards concentrated in the strong rooms of the banks to the minimum required for the proper performance of their peculiar functions. But it does not prevent (this Ricardo overlooks in certain conclusions he draws) a million men with different powers of productivity in their labour, turning into products very different masses of the means of production, and therefore preserving in their products very different masses of value; in consequence of which the values of the prod- ucts yielded may vary considerably. The Mahometan rulers of India understood this better than their English successors. Josiah Wedgwood, the inventor of modern pot- tery, himself originally a common workman, said in 1785 before the House of Commons that the whole trade employed from 15,000 to 20,000 people. Mr. Robert Gardner reduced the hours of labour in his two large fac- tories at Preston, on and after the 20th April, 1844, from twelve to eleven hours a day. Such a furnace, with its 4-6 groups, constitutes a glass house; and a glass manufactory comprises a number of such glass nouses, together with the apparatus and workmen requisite for the preparatory and final stages. The competition thus created between the labourers allows the capitalist to beat down the price of labour, whilst the falling price of labour allows him, on the other hand, to screw up still further the working-time. In 1819, the number of picks in power-loom-weaving per minute was 60— in 1842 it was 140, showing a vast increase of labour." 1 In the face of this remarkable intensity of labour which had already been reached in 1844 under the Twelve Hours' Act, there appeared to be a justification for the assertion made at that time by the English manufacturers, that any further progress in that direction was impossible, and therefore that every further reduction of the hours of labour meant a lessened production. c, p. Animals and plants, which we are accustomed to consider as products of Nature, are in their present form, not only products of, say last year's labour, but the result of a gradual transformation, con- tinued through many generations, under man's superintendence, and by means of his labour. Does not the his- tory of the productive organs of man, of organs that are the material basis of all social organisation, deserve equal attention? of this law runs: "L'aneantissement de toute espece de corpo- rations du meme etat et profession etant Time des bases fondamentales de la constitution francaise, il est defendu de les retablir de fait sous quelque pre- texte et sous quelque forme que ce soit." Article IV. 127, n. On the other hand, the peculiar nature of the commodity sold implies a limit to its consumption by the purchaser, and the labourer maintains his right as seller when he wishes to reduce the working-day to one of definite normal dura- tion. of yarn in the market, he must pay fifteen shillings for them. Neither lies, bribery, nor threats were spared in this attempt. * No branch of industry in England (we do not take into account the making of bread by machinery recently introduced) has preserved up to the present day a method of production so archaic, so — as we see from the poets of the Roman Em- pire — pre-christian, as baking. Diodorus long ago remarked this in relation to the ancient Egyptians. 119.) This passage shows, at one and the same time, the strength and the weakness of that kind of criticism which knows how to judge and condemn the present, but not how to compre- hend it. in 1815, the labour of following a pair of mules spinning cotton of No. 40— reckoning 12 hours to the working-day — involved a necessity of walking 8 miles. The thoroughly "respectable" British jurymen answered by a verdict that sent them to the next assizes on a charge of man- slaughter, and, in a gentle "rider" to their verdict, expressed the pious hope that the capitalistic magnates of the railways would, in future, be more extravagant in the purchase of a sufficient quantity of labour-power, and more "abstemious," more "self- denying," more "thrifty," in the draining of paid labour-power. But the over-work beyond this amount is in many cases, to use the words of the English official report, "truly fearful." 1 "It is impossible," the report continues, "for any mind to realise the amount of work described in the following passages as being performed by boys of from 9 to 12 years of age .... 1, 181,455 lbs. From the Statute Book it passed into Political Economy, and was handed down by Culpeper, J. The former appear directly and spontane- ously as current modes of thought; the latter must first be discov- ered by science. If a dressmaker can get a little circle of customers, such is the competition that, in her home, she must work to the death to hold together, and this same over-work she must of necessity inflict on any who may assist her. . In Belgium, one and the same furnace serves for both processes. "Nor is it a consequence that there must be depopulation, because men are not seen wasting their labour in the open field. Originally, Political Economy was studied by philoso- phers like Hobbes, Locke, Hume; by businessmen and statesmen, like Thomas More, Temple, Sully, De Witt, North, Law, Vanderlint, Cantillon, Franklin; and especially, and with the greatest success, by medical men like Petty, Barbon, Mandeville, Quesnay. This discrepancy is the result of his- torical causes, among which the chief are: — (1) The importation of foreign money into an imperfectly developed community. If we suppose that, all other circumstances remaining the same, the composi- tion of capital also remains constant (i.e., that a definite mass of means of production constantly needs the same mass of labour- power to set it in motion), then the demand for labour and the subsistence-fund of the labourers clearly increase in the same proportion as the capital, and the more rapidly, the more rapidly the capital increases. This product is the transformed shape of the commodity, or its gold-chrysalis. Everything produced by him was exclusively the result of his own personal labour, and therefore simply an object of use for himself. We have learnt to know its chief form under the rubric of "domestic industry." It recruits itself constantly from the supernumerary forces of modern indus- try and agriculture, and specially from those decaying branches of industry where handicraft is yielding to manufacture, manu- facture to machinery. Be- fore I turn to his present situation, a rapid retrospect. But when we come to more concrete forms, even this appearance of simplicity vanishes. . Instead of the real fact, we have the false semblance of an association, in which labourer and capi- talist divide the product in proportion to the different elements which they respectively contribute towards its formation. 543 CHAPTER XX TIME-WAGES Wages themselves again take many forms, a fact not recog* nisable in the ordinary economic treatises which, exclusively interested in the material side of the question, neglect every dif- ference of form. &c, for 30th April, 1860," p. Cer- tain beautiful fragments of the old statute vanished only in 1859. If one workman required considerably more time for the production of a commodity than is socially necessary, the duration of the necessary labour-time would, in his case, sen- sibly deviate from the labour-time socially necessary on an aver- age; and consequently his labour would not count as average la- bour, nor his labour-power as average labour-power. The result of difference in the natural conditions of labour is this, that the same quantity of labour satisfies, in different countries, a different mass of re- quirements, 3 consequently, that under circumstances in other re- 1 The necessity for predicting the rise and fall of the Nile created Egyp- tian astronomy, and with it the dominion of the priests, as directors of agri- culture. yds. Classical economy never arrived at a consciousness of the results of its own analysis; it accepted un- critically the categories "value of labour," "natural price of labour, " &c, as final and as adequate expressions for the value-relation un- der consideration, and was thus led, as will be seen later, into inextricable confusion and contradiction, while it offered to the vulgar economists a secure basis of operations for their shallow^ ness, which on principle worships appearances only. Despite the fanatical opposition of the army of perjured Free- traders, with Bright and Cobden at their head, the Ten Hours' Bill, struggled for so long, went through Parliament. Comm. of Fact, for 31st. Towards the end of the week the men begin on Thursday night at 10 o'clock, and continue on with only slight intermission until late on Saturday evening." 1 Even the bourgeois intellect understands the position of the "underselling" masters. Classical Political Economy nearly touches the true relation of things, without, however, consciously formulating it. On the other hand, a single needle-machine makes 145,000 in a working-day of 11 hours. 5 4 9 " 10. I mean their money-form. The value of the linen is represented as relative value, or appears in relative form. MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY in the mode of cultivation had led to the introduction of the indus- trial system. But, in that case, I must reverse the equation, in order to express the value of the coat relatively; and, so soon as I do that, the linen becomes the equivalent instead of the coat. Here it is not the piece of money that changes its place twice, but the com- modity. In face of the infamous cowardice of character that reigns to-day, and believes most devoutly in "the laws of commerce," it is our bounderi duty again and again to brand the Burkes, who only differ from their successors in one thing— talent. undoubtedly had the effect of throwing a very large number of men out of work. They are generally men who have no knowl- edge, and can scarcely understand the witnesses who are called before them, and the terms which are used and such like." "Would you have the jury composed of persons who had been employed in mining?" "Yes, partly .... It is as if this period had found Fortunatus' purse. Of course the ratio of surplus-value not only to that portion of the capital from which it immediately springs, and whose change of value it represents, but also to the sum total of the capital advanced is economically of very great importance. As the heavenly bodies, once thrown into a certain definite motion, always repeat this, so is it with social production as soon as it is once thrown into this move- ment of alternate expansion and contraction. The workpeople resisted, and said that the only remedy was to work short time, 4 days a-week; and their theory was the correct one. xvii. One conse- quence is that the female population grows more rapidly than the male, teste England. Its functional existence absorbs, so to say, its material existence. of yarn contained no cotton at all, and the whole \ 20 lbs. Let us exam- ine this a little more closely. 206.) 2 In reference to this statute, J. 531.) A working miner objects to the 17th section of the Act of 1860; he says, "At the present time, if the inspector of mines finds a part of the mine unfit to work in, he has to report it to the mine-owner and the Home Secretary. On the other hand, in the same years, the Chartist movement and the 10 hours' agitation reached their highest point. Six victims of starvation in one week! 2 "Child. 2 The reader must note that we are not speaking here of the wages or value that the labourer gets for a given labour-time, but of the value of the commodity in which that labour-time is materialised. 1 Thus the minimum of wages becomes a law of Nature to them. On the other hand they speak of the market- prices of labour, i.e., prices oscillating above or below its natural price. A statute of Elizabeth of 1562 leaves the length of the work- ing-day for all labourers "hired for daily or weekly wage" un- touched, but aims at limiting the intervals to 2y hours in the summer, or to 2 in the winter. 2 In order to understand that which follows, we must remember that "Close Villages" are those whose owners are one or two large landlords. The capitalistic form, on the con- trary, pre-supposes from first to last, the free wage-labourer, who sells his labour power to capital. . 4.) * 1. Gold is now money with reference to all other commodities only because it was previously, with reference to them, a simple commodity. 238, 249, 261, 262. The opposite is the fact. The diseases most observable amongst them are phthisis, bronchitis, irregularity of uterine functions, hysteria in its most aggravated forms, and rheumatism. If, then, twenty-four hours' labour, or two working-days, are required to produce the quantity of gold represented by twelve shillings, we have here, to begin with, two days' labour already incorporated in the yarn. (1.) A shortening of the working-day under the conditions given above, leaves the value of labour-power, and with it, the necessary labour-time, unaltered. 4 The economic development of the United States is itself a product of European, more especially of English modern industry. "If," dreamed Aristotle, the greatest thinker of antiquity, "if every tool, when summoned, or even of its own accord, could do the work that befits it, just as the creations of Daedalus moved of themselves, or the tripods of Hephaestos went of their own accord to their sacred work, if the weavers' shuttles were to weave of themselves, then there would be no need either of apprentices for the master workers, or of slaves for the lords." 1 And Antipatros, a Greek poet of the time of Cicero, hailed the invention of the water-wheel for grinding corn, an in- vention that is the elementary form of all machinery, as the giver of freedom to female slaves, and the bringer back of the golden age. That the love of lucre induces an easy belief in such miracles, and that sycophant doctrinaires are never wanting to prove them, is vouched for by the following incident of historical ce- lebrity. x No mystical ideas must in any way be connected, as sometimes happens, with this historically devel- oped productiveness of labour. 466. -Gov. He can, under the pretence of paying "the nor- mal price of labour," abnormally lengthen the working-day with- out any corresponding compensation to the labourer. In order to get an idea of the horrors of this sphere, in which capital conducts its exploitation in the background of modern mechanical industry, one must go to the apparently quite idyllic trade of nail-making, l carried on in a few remote villages of England. 1 I allude here to hammered nails, as distinguished from nails cut out and made bv machinery. . But since there are always several generations of labourers living at one time, and working together at the manufacture of a given article, the technical skill, the tricks of the trade thus acquired, become es- tablished, and are accumulated and handed down. Saturday we leave off at 6 p. pp. is at Is., and increase regularly till bread is Is. 5d.; when it is above that sum, decrease regularly till it be at 2s., and then his food should be-^-th less." 1 Before the Com- mittee of Inquiry of the House of Lords, 1814, a certain A. c, 74.) 2 "Historical and descriptive account of Brit India, v &c ," by Hugh Mur- ray and James Wilson, &c, Edinburgh 1832. On the contrary, such an equation merely says that 20 yards of linen are nothing else than 20 yards of linen, a definite quantity of the use-value linen. In the present case this condition no longer applies. These were the silk manufacturers. GENESIS OP THE INDUSTRIAL CAPITALIST 755 in industry or even in usury. If they are wanting in docility he can use force; in other words, he can take possession of them. Or else he receives for 12 hours' labour less than 6s., i.e., less than 12 hours' labour. c, p. Were they obliged to toil the year round, the whole six days in the week, in a repetition of the same work, might it not blunt their ingenuity, and render them stupid in- stead of alert and dexterous; and might not our workmen lose their reputation instead of maintaining it by such eternal slavery? Peto, was in ttie odour of sanctity. be considered as an engine, 1 "L'ouvrier qui porte dans ses bras tout un metier, peut aller partout exercer son industrie et trouver des moyens de subsister: 1'autre (the manu- facturing labourer) n'est qu'un accessoire qui, separe de ses confreres, n'a plus ni capacite, ni independance, et qui se trouve force d'accepter_ la loi qu'on juge a propos de lui imposer." (Storch., 1. The necessity for giving an external expression to this EXCHANGE §7 contrast for the purposes of commercial intercourse, urges on the establishment of an independent form of value, and finds no rest until it is once for all satisfied by the differentiation of com- modities into commodities and money. 13,989 . They have risen by means as vile as those by which the Roman freedman once on a time made himself the master of his patronus. Force is the midwife of every old society pregnant with a new one. The bodily form of the linen is now the form assumed in common by the values COMMODITIES 67 of all commodities; it therefore becomes directly exchangeable with all and every of them. The burden of labour, like the rock, keeps ever falling back on the worn-out la- bourer." 2 At the same time that factory work exhausts the nervous mules to sweep the floor whilst the mules are in motion. 16). 6-9, passim. Such co-operation is distinguished from capitalistic co-operation by both of the above characteristics. Meanwhile, the number of houses was one less. . This metamorphosis, this conversion of money into capital, takes place both within the sphere of circulation and also outside it; within the circulation, THE LABOUR-PROCESS 195 because conditioned by the purchase of the labour-power in the market; outside the circulation, because what is done within it is only a stepping-stone to the production of surplus-value, a process which is entirely confined to the sphere of production. Econ.," p. Its production is in- cluded in that of the relative surplus-population, its necessity in theirs; along with the surplus-population, pauperism forms a con- dition of capitalist production, and of the capitalist development of wealth. By our explanation of the different parts played by the vari- ous factors of the labour-process in the formation of the prod- uct's value, we have, in fact, disclosed the characters of the different functions allotted to the different elements of capital hand, re-appears in the value of that vigour, is not the means of subsistence, but their value. 2 But, both before and after these divisions are made, a definite weight of metal is the standard of metallic money. This is stated in all seriousness by Mon- tesquieu: "Si Ton compare la masse de Tor et de l'argent qui est dans le monde avec la somme des marchandises qui y sont, il est certain que chaque denree ou marchandise, en particulier, pourra etre comparee a une certaine portion de la masse entiere. M. The neglect in its centre, becomes mortifica- tion at its extremities, north and south, where the houses are rotting to pieces. In so far as the machine has value, and, in consequence, parts with value to the product, it forms an element in the value of that product. When machinery is first 1 "Occasion . There never was a hesitation as to the answer."... But this change of hands is what constitutes their exchange, and the latter puts them in relation with each other as values, and realises them as values. The more, therefore, capital increases by means of successive accumulations, the more does the sum of the value increase that is divided into consumption-fund and accumulation-fund. or Is., and there is the wear of the tools, the cosl. Ainsi faMtes-vous, quand vous vous emparez du sol.... In the corvee the surplus-labour is accurately marked off from the necessary labour. The collier is bound to take as part of his hiring a house surround- ed with pestiferous influences; he cannot help himself, and it appears doubtful whether anyone else can help him except his proprietor (he is, to all intents and purposes, a serf), and his proprietor first consults his balance-sheet, and the result is tolerably certain. Later on, we try to decipher the hieroglyphic, to get behind the secret of our own social products; for to stamp an object of utility as a value, is just as much a social product as language. I, p. They declare the clauses of the Act of 1860, which require a school cer- tificate to be obtained before employing boys of 10 and 12 years of age, to be quite illusory. I will, however, cite for the benefit of the romantic sycophant, Adam Miiller, who admires the "generous liberality" with which the English Government coins gratuitously, the fol- lowing opinion of Sir Dudley North: "Silver and gold, like other commodi- ties, have their ebbings and flowings. In many manu- factures, however, the group itself is an organised body of labour, the total mechanism being a repetition or multiplication of these elementary organisms. c, 82, p. He profits, not only by what he receives from, but by what he gives to, the labourer. As regards Wales, that which is said in the text holds only for the south-west. The English cotton operative is in every THE WORKING-DAY 269 What experience shows to the capitalist genarally is a con- stant excess of population, i.e., an excess in relation to the momentary requirements of surplus-labour-absorbing capital, although this excess is made up of generations of human beings stunted, short-lived, swiftly replacing each other, plucked, so to say, before maturity. . 9.) "This system PIECE-WAGES 555 the day's or week's wage will vary with the individual differences of the labourers, of whom one supplies in a given time the mini- mum of product only, another the average, a third more than the average. Let the value of the linen remain constant, while the value of the coat varies. Nevertheless, the baking trade is always over- whelmed with applicants. The fact that the latter therefore has a value is expressed by saying that the coat is directly ex- changeable with it. 1 The determination of the magnitude of value by labour-time is therefore a secret, hidden under the apparent fluctuations in the relative values of commodities. All labour appears as paid labour. These two antithetical transmutations of a commodity are brought about by two antithetical social acts on the part of the owner, and these acts in their turn stamp the character of the economic parts played by him. But, on the other hand, as soon as (in the colonies, e.g.) adverse circumstances pre- vent the creation of an industrial reserve army and, with it, the absolute dependence of the working-class upon the capitalist class, capital, along with its commonplace Sancho Panza, rebels against the "sacred" law of supply and demand, and tries to check its inconvenient action by forcible means and State interference. c, p. 4 Merivale, 1. This manoeuvre also failed. But hand-in-hand with the increasing productivity of labour, goes, as we have seen, the cheap- ening of the labourer, therefore a higher rate of surplus-value, even when the real wages are rising. 189.) In this case it is evident that a diminution in the unpaid labour in no way interferes with the extension of the domain of capital. You pay me for one day's labour-power, whilst you use that of 3 days. On the other hand, the mass of machinery, beasts of burden, mineral manures, drain-pipes, &c, is a condition of the increasing productivity of labour. 342. 3, n. The greater the amount of the payments concentrated, the less is this balance relatively to that amount, and the less is the mass of the means of payment in circula- tion. In the first form, 20 yds. Being a transient and objective reflex of the prices of commodi- ties, it serves only as a symbol of itself, and is therefore capable of being replaced by a token. MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 377 ly used during the infancy of Modern Industry. "Soyons riches ou parais- sons riches" (Diderot). . On the whole, therefore, during the period from 1844 to 1847, the 12 hours' working-day became general and uniform in all branches of industry under the Factory Act. 9, 15, 16, 17.) 1 In Part I. c, ii, p. 12, 14, 18.) 1 This sort of labour goes on mostly in small workshops, as we have seen in the lace-making and straw-plaiting trades, and as could be shown more in detail from the metal trades of Sheffield, Birmingham, &c. It is true, these regulations con- tained in the statute mentioned by Petty, apply also to ap- prentices. It is once again the direct action of man on Nature which becomes an immediate source of greater accumulation, without the intervention of any new capital. The establishment and maintenance of a connexion between the isolated functions neces- sitates the incessant transport of the article from one hand to another, and from one process to another. The landholders in most parishes that have been enclosed only 15 or 20 years, are very few in comparison of the numbers who occupied them in their open- field state. However this may be, the mere continuity of the process, the simple reproduction, brings about some other wonderful changes, which affect not only the variable, but the total capital. 6 hours surplus-labour Surplus-value of 3 sh. The worker knows now when that which he sells is ended, and when his own begins; and by possessing a sure foreknowledge of this, is enabled to pre-arrange his own minutes for his own purposes." (1. In the corvee, the labour of the worker for himself, and his compulsory labour for his lord, differ in space and time in the clearest possible way. Rep.," p. A born leveller and a cynic, it is always ready to exchange not only soul, but body, with any and every other commodity, be the same more repulsive than Maritor- nes herself. . At the end of one hour's spinning, that act is represented by a definite quantity of yarn; in other words, a definite quantity of labour, namely that of one hour, has become embodied in the cotton. They lived like misers, and were far from consuming even the interest on their capital. . The dye-works and bleach-works all came under the Factory Act of 1850 in I860; 3 lace and stocking manufactures in 1861. V. In order that variable capital may perform its function, constant capital must be advanced in proper proportion, a proportion given by the special technical conditions of each labour-process. 1858.— 1 in 15. The system of public credit, i.e., of national debts, whose origin we discover in Genoa and Venice as early as the middle ages, took possession of Europe generally during the manufac- turing period. von Dr. Rud. Nevertheless the analysis of every possible case is easy in view of the results given in I., II., and III. The value of silver being for that purpose estimated at its price in the London market. The contradiction is not more glaring than that other one that there is a complaint of the want of hands, while at the same time many thousands are out of work, because the division of labour chains them to a particular branch of industry. It then goes through the second phase of its circulation, not under its own natural shape, but under the shape of money. 83, n. 8.) 8 "L'argent ... In this way Political Economy expected to penetrate athwart the acciden- tal prices of labour, to the value of labour. Their chief diet is bread, fruit, herbs, roots, and dried fish; for they very seldom eat flesh; and when wheat is dear, they eat very little bread." 4 "To which may be added," our essayist goes on, "that their drink is either water or other small liquors, so that they spend very little money. 1846. school attendance... He was talking with some capitalists of Canada and the state of New York, where the immigrant wave often becomes stagnant and deposits a sediment of "supernumerary" labourers. We get tea once a week; at other times we get stirabout, sometimes of oat-meal, sometimes of Indian meal, as we are able to get it. 207-210.) More! less! not sufficiently! so far! not altogether! What clearness and precision of ideas and language! And such eclectic professorial twaddle i is modestly baptised by Mr. Roscher, "the anatomico-physiological method!' of Political Economy! One discovery however, he must have credit for, Aamely, that money is "a pleasant commodity." EXCHANGE 93 in production assume a material character independent of their control and conscious individual action. enabled to perfect himself by practice in one point, became ... The third and lastly developed form expresses the values of the whole world of commodities in terms of a single commodity set apart for the purpose, namely, the linen, and thus represents to us their values by means of their equality with linen. The Messrs. Suppose the following articles to be sold or partially meta- morphosed simultaneously in different localities: say, one quarter of wheat, 20 yards of linen, one Bible, and 4 gallons of brandy. 2 Number of persons of all ages employed in the respective industries. But this unity of differences manifests itself at two opposite poles, and at each pole in an opposite way. Dr. Simon, the chief medical officer of the Privy Council and the official editor of the "Public Health Reports," says: "In my fourth Report (1863) I s lowed, how it is practically impossible for the workpeople to insist upon that which is their first sanitary right, viz., the right that, no matter what the work for which their employer brings them together, the labour, so far as it depends upon him, should be freed from all avoidably unwholesome conditions. c, p. The capitalist system pre-supposes the complete separation of the labourers from all property in the means by which they can realise their labour. Just as the individual machine retains a dwarfish character, so long as it is worked by the power of man alone, and just as no system of machinery could be properly developed before the steam-engine took the place of the earlier motive powers, animals, wind, and even water; so, too, Modern Industry was crippled in its complete development, so long as its characteristic instrument of production, the machine, owed its existence to personal strength and personal skill, and depended on the muscular development, the keenness of sight, and the cunning of hand, with which the detail workmen in manufactures, and the manual labourers in handicrafts, wielded their dwarfish imple- ments. Yet for all that he withdraws 3 shillings more from circu- lation than he originally threw into it. 398 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION is divided, there are, for every 100,000 children alive under the age of one year, only 9,000 deaths in a year on an average (iD one district only 7,047); in 24 districts the deaths are over 10,000, but under 11,000, in 39 districts, over 11,000, but under 12,000; in 48 districts over 12,000, but under 13,000; in 22 districts over 20,000; in 25 districts over 21,000; in 17 over 22,000; in 11 over 23,000; in Hoo, Wolverhampton, Ashton-under-Lyne, and Pres- ton, over 24,000; in Nottingham, Stockport, and Bradford, over 25,000; in Wisbeach, 26,000; and in Manchester, 26,125 l . 1736.) "You would be ob'liged to stop the employment of wom- en in the ironworks as well, would you not, if you stopped it in the collieries?" "I cannot speak for any other trade." (n. 4d., 3s. CONTRADICTIONS IN THE FORMULA OF CAPITAL 161 ties comes to him now as seller, who in this capacity also enjoys the privilege of selling his commodities 10% too dear. These figure in the census as Londoners, they swell out the number of heads on which the Lon- don death-rate is calculated, without adding proportionally to the number of deaths in that place. The total number of persons, therefore, employed in these five new industries amounts to 94,145. Even in Cromwell's time, the building of a house within 4 miles of London was forbidden unless it was endowed with 4 acres of land. The most essential condition to the production of machines by machines was a prime mover capable of exerting any amount of force, and yet under perfect control. And this law only dealt with child-labour. And the history of this, their expropriation, is written in the annals of mankind in letters of blood and fire. Wages are much lower than in England, in many cases 50%, but the number of hands in proportion to the machinery was much greater, in certain depart- ments in the proportion of 5 : 3— Mr. Redgrave gives very full de- tails as to the Russian cotton factories. . M.'s Secre- taries of Embassy and Legation on the Manufactures, Commerce, &c, No. 6, 1863." The want of connexion alone, between the processes into which the pro- duction of articles that merely consist of parts fitted together is split up, makes it very difficult to convert such a manufacture into a branch of modern industry carried on by machinery; but in the case of a watch there are two other impediments in addition, the minuteness and delicacy of its parts, and its character as an article of luxury. The confusion caused by attributing a hidden meaning to these cabalistic signs is all the greater, because these money-names express both the values of commodities, and, at the same time, aliquot parts of the weight of the metal that is 1 "Le monete le quali oggi sono ideali sono le piu antiche d'ogni na- zione, e tutte furono un tempo reali, e perche erano reali con esse si con tava." (Galiani: Delia moneta, 1. 34. 213. And how this price is deter- mined, is just the question. 6); or as Butler says — "The value of a thing Is just as much as it will bring." COMMODITIES 37 A given commodity, e.g., a quarter of wheat is exchanged for x blacking, y silk, or z gold, &c— in short, for other commodi- ties in the most different proportions. And only by virtue of this function does gold, the equivalent commodity par excellence, become money. to 6 p. of Insp. of Fact for 31st Oct., 1856," p. 39.) S. and xliv.) Mean- while, late by night perhaps, self-denying Mr. Glass-Capital, primed with port wine, reels out of his club homeward droning out idiotically, "Britons never, never shall be slaves!" 1 In England even now occasionally in rural districts a labourer is condemned to imprisonment for desecrating the Sabbath, by working in his front garden. Let the lat- ter be 12 hours, and the daily value of labour-power 3 shillings, the value of the product of 6 hours of labour. c, p. In the slave-states bordering on the Gulf of Mexico, down to the date of the civil war, ploughs constructed on old Chinese models, which turned up the soil like a hog or a mole, instead of making furrows, were alone to be found. This inversion has no existence for two out of the three persons who transact business together. During the manufacturing period, handicraft labour, al- tered though it was by division of labour, was yet the basis. But that which in the miser is a mere idiosyn- crasy, is, in the capitalist, the effect of the social mechanism, of which he is but one of the wheels. This cir- cumstance so completely rivets his influence in the open villages 1 "Child. Such does a usurer, and sits the while safe on his stool, when he ought rather to be hanging on the gallows, and be eaten by as many ravens as he has stolen guilders, if only there were so much flesh on him, that so many ravens could stick their beaks in and share it. On l^his Rus- sian soil, so fruitful of all infamies, the old horrors of the early days of English factories are in full swing. The first description is applicable to every possible employment of machinery on a large scale, the second is characteristic of its use by capital, and therefore of the modern factory system. On looking around us we cannot but see, that they are unable to find their level for a long time; and that when they do find it, the level is always lower than at the commencement of the process." ("An Inquiry into those Principles Respecting the Nature of Demand," &c. etablir en regie generale, que moins l'autorite preside a la division du travail dans l'interieur de la societe, plus la division du travail se developpe dans l'interieur de l'atelier, et plus elle y est soumise a l'autorite d'unseul. But it is also only from then onwards that commodity production is generalised and becomes the typical form of production; it is only from then onwards that, from the first, every product is produced for sale and all wealth produced goes through the sphere of cir- culation. When, therefore, money serves as a measure of value, it is employed only as imaginary or ideal money. A carriage, for example, was formerly the product of the labour of a great number of independent artificers, such as wheelwrights, harness-makers, tailors, locksmiths, up- holsterers, turners, fringe-makers, glaziers, painters, polishers, gilders, &c. To nothing more probably than the relaxation of the working people in their own way. A pearl or a dia- mond is valuable" as a pearl or diamond. In so far as actual pay- ments have to be made, money does not serve as a circulating medium, as a mere transient agent in the interchange of products, but as the individual incarnation of social labour, as the inde- pendent form of existence of exchange-value, as the universal com- modity. We are told the workers wish it" (emigration). Hence, independently of this latter circum- stance, there is a motive for each individual capitalist to cheap- en his commodities, by increasing the productiveness of labour. 626 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION Capital grows in one place to a huge mass in a single hand, because it has in another place been lost by many. Deer have received extended ranges, while men have been hunted within a narrower and still narrower circle. This power tells throughout the whole class. 2 George Read, "The History of Baking," London, 1848, p. It is therefore impossible that outside the sphere of circu- lation, a producer of commodities can, without coming into con- tact with other commodity-owners, expand value, and conse- quently convert money or commodities into capital. 22. And yet the conditions of service were at times better after the war than 100 years later; the farm servants of Silesia had, in 1652, meat twice a week, w T hilst even in our century, districts are known where they have it only three times a year. His development into a full-grown capitalist must take place, both within the sphere of circulation and without it. The extreme badness is in the high number of men found in one room, in the smallness of the ground- plot on which a great number of houses are thrust, the want of water, the absence of privies, and the frequent placing of one house on the top of another, or distribution into flats, . But while in Nuremberg that single artificer performed a series of perhaps 20 operations one after another, in England it was not long before there were 20 needlemakers side by side, each performing one alone of those 20 operations, and in consequence of further experience, each of those 20 operations was again split up, isolated, and made the exclusive function of a separate workman. He cannot take the one without giving the other. . The question arises, how much will it attract? 2 M— C, a purchase, is, at the same time, C— M, a sale; the con- cluding metamorphosis of one commodity is the first metamor- phosis of another. The French Revolution had found passionate defend- ers in the United Kingdom; the "principle of population," slowly worked out in the eighteenth century, and then, in the midst of a great social cri- sis, proclaimed with drums and trumpets as the infallible antidote to the teachings of Condorcet, &.c, was greeted with jubilance by the English oli- garchy as the great destroyer of all hankerings afler human development. 32. 2 "Ch. Empl. 339). An extraneous element weighs the balance heavily against him .... 114, n. But along with this growth, there is at the same time developed in his breast, a Faustian con- flict between the passion for accumulation, and the desire for enjoyment. But in the great majority of cases, instruments of labour show even to the most superficial observer, traces of the labour of past ages. It takes centuries ere the "free" labourer, thanks to the development of capitalistic production, agrees, i.e., is compelled by social conditions, to sell the whole of his active life, his very capacity for work, for the price of the necessaries of life, his birthright for a mess of pottage. 44,653 ts. When the working-day is prolonged, the price of labour- power may fall below its value, although that price be nominally unchanged or even rise. We have now to consider this labour under a very different aspect from that which it had during the labour-process; there, we viewed it solely as that particular kind of human activity which changes cotton into yarn; there, the more the labour was suited to the work, the better the yarn, other circumstances remaining the same. Some portion of the furniture and tools which they use is commonly made by themselves. Ferguson who showed the disadvantageous effects of division of labour, Adam Smith was perfectly clear on this point. iii. The simplest form of the circulation of commodities is C — M— C, the transformation of commodities into money, and the 1 The contrast between the power, based on the personal relations of dominion and servitude, that is conferred by landed property, and the imper- sonal power that is given by money, is well expressed by the two French proverbs, "Nulle terre sans seigneur," and "L'argent n'a pas de maitre" THE GENERAL FORMULA FOR CAPITAL 147 change of the money back again into commodities; or selling in order to buy. The same quantity of labour is also embodied in a piece of gold of the value of three shillings. is here merely a symbol to show that this value un- dergoes a process. 44 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION may possibly not take place without friction, but take place it must. Laing estimates that in England (and Wales) the livelihood of 11,300,000 people depends on unskilled labour. 3 It is moreover now the personal interest of the labourer to lengthen the working-day, since with it his daily or weekly wages rise. Great part of this newly built in good style; demand for houses appears very marked, since very miserable cots let at Is. to Is. 3d. Coin and symbols of value That money takes the shape of coin, springs from its function as the circulating medium. Bailey.) 50 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION coats, every such statement implies that the linen and coats, as magnitudes of value, are expressions of the same unit, things of the same kind. 4 However, the principle had triumphed with its victory in those great branches of industry which form the most character- istic creation of the modern mode of production. In hand- icrafts and manufacture, the workman makes use of a tool, in the factory, the machine makes use of him. 9d. c.) 2 In January, 1861, John C. If, for instance, a sum of £100 has this year been converted into capital, and produced a surplus-value of £20, it SIMPLE REPRODUCTION 567 must continue during next year, and subsequent years, to repeat the same operation. 6. Indeed ... The form of direct barter is x use-value A= y use-value B. Such last-mentioned article, by becoming the equivalent of various other commodities, acquires at once, though within narrow limits, the character of a general social equivalent. The first form, A, furnishes such equations as the following: — 1 coat =20 yards of linen, 10 lbs. The farmers do not always till sufficiently the corn and turnip lands, and the landlord has found it best to throw all his farms together into 2 or 3. On the one hand, it was to the interest of the middle-class agitators to prove how little the Corn Laws protected the actual producers of the corn. 352 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION difference which, when different communities come in contact, calls forth the mutual exchange of products, and the consequent gradual conversion of those products into commodities. THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 657 will have been no adequate protection — dwelling space will have been stinted to the degree in which over-crowding produces or increases disease; of household utensils and furniture there will have been scarcely any — even cleanliness will have been found costly or difficult, and if there still be self-respectful endeavours to maintain it, every such endeavour will represent additional pangs of hunger. Annual increase per cent, of the population of England and Wales in decimal numbers: 1811-1821 1.533 per cent. When I state that coats or boots stand in a relation to linen, because it is the universal incarnation of abstract human labour, the absurdity of the statement is self-evident. 1691, pp. . From the last third of the 15th century he finds continually complaints, only inter- rupted at certain intervals, about the encroachment of capitalist farming in the country districts, and the progressive destruction of the peasantry. The land, formerly overspread with small tenants or labourers, was peopled in proportion to its produce, but under the new system of improved cultivation and increased rents, the largest possible produce is obtained at the least possible expense: and the use- less hands being, with this view, removed, the population is reduced, not to what the land will maintain, but to what it will employ. * One example will suffice. Verri, 1. One-sixth as much new labour is absorbed by each pound of cotton, and consequently, the value added by the labour to each pound is only one-sixth of what it formerly was. Therefore, in the circuit C — M — G, the expenditure of money has nothing to do with its reflux. m. m. At least, some such assumption was necessary since only commodity-owners with equal rights confronted each other, and the sole means by which 584 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION a man could become possessed of the commodities of others, was by alienating his own commodities; and these could be replaced by labour alone. Otway, Belfast. Nevertheless, Ricardo's school simply shirked the problem, they did not solve it. of Insp. c, pp. 2 1. Greater outlay of capital per acre, and, as a consequence, more rapid concentra- tion of farms, were essential conditions of the new method. 48. To-mor- row, like a swarm of locusts, come crowding in masses of ragged Irishmen or decayed English agricultural labourers. But thereby a definite quantity of human muscle, nerve, brain, &c, is wasted, and these require to be restored. 23. Before the rise of machin- ery, a manufacturer's evening expenditure at the public house where they all met, never exceeded sixpence for a glass of punch, and a penny for a screw of tobacco. . In the elementary form, under which we have hitherto viewed it, co-operation is a necessary concomitant of all production on a large scale, but it does not, in itself, represent a fixed form charac- teristic of a particular epoch in the development of the capitalist mode of production. the gross. The gold is most- ly native, but disseminated throughout the quartz in minute quantities. 85.) 1 The over-worked "die off with strange rapidity; but the places of those who perish are instantly filled, and a frequent change of persons makes no alteration in the scene." ("England and America." London, 1833, vol. 740 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION dependent upon home agriculture. 101. It always ends in the ruin of many small cap- italists, whose capitals partly pass into the hands of their con- querors, partly vanish. 205, 9th Ed., p. . Since the demand for 3 ' 4 ' 5 ' 6 ' 8 labour is determined not by the amount of capital as a whole, but by its variable constituent alone, that demand falls progressively with the increase of the total capital, instead of, as previously assumed, rising in proportion to it. So also, owing to the abundance of clothing materials produced by machinery, the number of tailors, seamstresses and needle- women, went on increasing until the appearance of the sewing- machine. A radical change in the mode of production in one sphere of industry involves a similar change in other spheres. Thus the original conversion of money into capital is achieved in the most exact accordance with the economic laws of commod- ity production and with the right of property derived from them. 1848, p. Where Nature is too lavish, she "keeps him in hand, like a child in leading-strings." She does not impose upon him any necessity to develop himself. Taking them as a whole, the general movements of wages are exclusively regulated by the expansion and contraction of the industrial reserve army, and these again correspond to the pe- riodic changes, of the industrial cycle. xiii.) 266 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION But the value of the labour-power includes the value of the commodities necessary for the reproduction of the worker, or for the keeping up of the working-class. The relative mass of the industrial reserve army increases therefore with the potential energy of wealth. E.\ 1 The opponents, themselves, of the mercantile system, a system which considered the settlement of surplus trade balances in gold and silver as the aim of international trade, entirely misconceived the functions of money of the world. See "Des classes ouvrieres en France, pendant l'annee 1848. I know nothing of a man, by knowing that his name is Jacob. 8.) The wished-for goal of English capital is no longer Continental wages but Chinese. The spirit of capitalist produc- tion stands out clearly in the ludicrous wording of the so-called education clauses in the Factory Acts, in the absence of an admin- istrative machinery, an absence that again makes the compul- sion illusory, in the opposition of the manufacturers themselves to these education clauses, and in the tricks and dodges they put in practice for evading them. The late cotton crisis also furnished edifying examples of the sagacity shown by the factory autocrats in making deductions from wages. He ap- proached to republicanism in his political principles." ("The Bee." By James Anderson, 18 Vols., Vol. The isolated expres- sion of A's value, is therefore convertible into a series, prolonged to any length, of the different elementary expressions of that value. It is only in the markets of the world that money acquires to the full extent the character of the commodity whose bodily form is also the immediate social incarnation of human labour in the abstract. l.p. 222.) Lassalle in his note on this passage, p. We are, however, apprehensive that the present Act (43rd of Elizabeth) will not warrant a prudential measure of this kind; but you are to learn that the rest of the freeholders of the county, and of the adjoining county of B, will very readily join in instructing their members to propose an Act to enable the parish to contract with a person to lock up and work the poor; and to declare that if any person shall refuse to be so locked up and worked, he shall be en- titled to no relief. An English and a Chinese spinner, e.g., may work the same number of hours with the same intensity; then they will both 606 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION in a week create equal values. Par M. 46,673 1,594 Wales . That the latter has laid out his capital in a teaching factory, instead of in a sausage factory, does not alter the relation. Our difficulty may perhaps have arisen from treating the actors as personifications instead of as individuals. They managed, in fact, to intimidate the government to such an extent that in 1835 it proposed to lower the limit of the age of childhood from 13 to 12. As the measure of value it serves to convert the values of all the manifold commodities into prices, into imaginary quan- tities of gold; as the standard of price it measures those quanti- ties of gold. . It is, however , easily seen that since a machine no more creates new value than any other part of constant capital, it cannot add any value under the name of "interest." It is also evident that here, where we are treating of the production of surplus-value, we cannot assume a priori the existence of any part of that value under the name of interest. 1 SECTION 8.— REVOLUTION EFFECTED IN MANUFACTURE, HANDICRAFTS, AND DOMESTIC INDUSTRY BY MODERN INDUSTRY a. The French do so, when holidays do not intervene. 10.) 514 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION of the seasons, which form the physical basis for the social divi- sion of labour, and which, by changes in the natural surroundings, spur man on to the multiplication of his wants, his capabilities, his means and modes of labour. The heat, partly due to the gas stoves used for warming the irons, is horrible Even when moderate hours of work, i.e., from 8 in the morning till 6 in the evening, prevail in such places, yet 3 or 4 persons fall into a swoon regularly every day." 2 The revolution in the industrial methods which is the nec- essary result of the revolution in the instruments of production, is effected by a medley of transition forms. of yarn=the value of 40 lbs. There they were thrown like refuse into garrets, holes, cel- lars and corners, in the worst back slums. As our people are famed for bravery in war, do we not say that it is owing to good English roast beef and pudding in their bellies, as well as their constitutional spirit of liberty? But the precious metals at the sources of their production are directly exchanged for other commodities. Where the transition is rapid, the effect is acute and felt by great masses. 2 In both cases, be the machine ever so young and full of life, its value is no longer determined by the labour actually materialised in it, but by the labour-time requisite to reproduce either it or the better machine. Bruxelles, 1837. Political Economy has indeed analysed, however incom- pletely, 1 value and its magnitude, and has discovered what lies beneath these forms. iron. On the return journey what Fourier calls "phanerogamie," is the order of the day. There was, however, an important fact which prevented Aristotle from seeing that, to attribute value to commodities, is 60 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION merely a mode of expressing all labour as equal human labour, and consequently as labour of equal quality. — F. 114. This peculiar course of modern industry, which occurs in no earlier period of human history, was also impossible in the childhood of capitalist production. Thus gold always renders the same service as an invariable standard of price, however much its value may vary. With accumulation, and the development of the productiveness of labour that accompanies it, the power of sudden expansion of capital grows also; it grows, not merely because the elasticity of the capital already function- ing increases, not merely because the absolute wealth of society expands, of which capital only forms an elastic part, not merely because credit, under every special stimulus, at once places an unusual part of this wealth at the disposal of production in the form of additional capital; it grows, also, because the technical conditions of the process of production themselves — machinery, means of transport, &c. CONSTANT CAPITAL AND VARIABLE CAPITAL 209 in the process of expanding its own value. c, pp. Hence, if the value of commodity A remain constant, its relative value expressed in commodity B rises and falls inversely as the value of B. It is reflected in the rise and fall of the Income-tax. . The ratio of the necessary labour to the surplus-labour, which un- der average social conditions was 5:1, is now only 5:3. 2 Ure, 1. Given the rate at which machinery transfers its value to the product, the amount of value so transferred depends on the total value of the machinery. E.\ 48 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION developing the expression of value implied in the value-relation of commodities, from its simplest, almost imperceptible outline, to the dazzling money-form. Sullivan sold his contract to one Binn for £40,000; Binn sold it the same day for £60,000, and the ultimate pur- chaser who carried out the contract declared that after all he realised an enormous gain. To give an idea of the extent of the sphere embraced by the Workshops' Regulation Act in its application, we cite from its interpretation clause, the following passages: "Handicraft shall mean any manual labour exercised by way of trade, or for purposes of gain in, or incidental to, the making any article or part of an article, or in, or incidental to, the altering, repairing, ornamenting, finishing, or otherwise adapt- ing for sale any article." "Workshop shall mean any room or place whatever in the open air or under cover, in which any handicraft is carried on by any child, young person, or woman, and to which and over which the person by whom such child, young person, or woman is employed, has the right of access and control." 1 Senior, "Social Science Congress," pp. For- merly the individual work of a Nuremberg artificer, the watch has been transformed into the social product of an immense number of detail labourers, such as mainspring makers, dial makers, spi- ral spring makers, jewelled hole makers, ruby lever makers, hand makers, case makers, screw makers, gilders, with numerous sub- divisions, such as wheel makers (brass and steel separate), pin mak- ers, movement makers, acheveur de pignon (fixes the wheels on the axles, polishes the facets, &c), pivot makers, planteur de fmis- sage (puts the wheels and springs in the works), finisseur de baril- let (cuts teeth in the wheels, makes the holes of the right size, &c), escapement makers, cylinder makers for cylinder escape- ments, escapement wheel makers, balance wheel makers, raquette makers (apparatus for regulating the watch), the planteur d'ech- appement (escapement maker proper); then the repasseur de ba- rillet (finishes the box for the spring, &c), steel polishers, wheel polishers, screw polishers, figure painters, dial enamellers (melt the enamel on the copper), fabricant de pendants (makes the ring by which the case is hung), finisseur de charniere (puts the brass hinge in the cover, &c), faiseur de secret (puts in the springs that open the case), graveur, ciseleur, polisseur de boite, &c, &c, and last of all the repasseur, who fits together the whole watch and DIVISION OF LABOUR AND MANUFACTURE 343 hands it over in a going state. "The modern steam-engine of 100 horse-power is capable of being driven at a much greater force than formerly, arising from improvements in its construction, the capacity and construction of the boilers, &c," ... 2 If the reader reminds me of Malthus, whose "Essay on Population" appeared in 1798, I remind him that this work in its first form is nothing more than a schoolboyish, superficial plagiary of De Foe, Sir James Steuart, Townsend, Franklin, Wallace, &c, and does not contain a single sentence thought out by himself. There the capitalist regime everywhere comes into collision with the resistance of the producer, who, as owner of his own conditions of labour, employs that labour to enrich himself, instead of the capitalist. Upon 618 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION only becomes more extensive, i.e., the sphere of capital's exploitation and rule merely extends with its own dimensions and the number of its subjects. 3 "A negro is a negro. The person who is a seller in the first transaction thus becomes a buyer in the second, in which a third commodity- owner appears on the scene as a seller. "Now, as the quantity produced must, in the main, be regu- lated by the speed of the machinery, it must be the interest of the mill-owner to drive it at the utmost rate of speed consistent with these following conditions, viz., the preservation of the machinery from too rapid deterioration; the preservation of the quality of the article manufactured; and the capability of the workman to follow the motion without a greater exertion than he can sustain for a constancy. It is to be seen everywhere, in harvest-time as 1 "The heaven-born employment of the hind gives dignity even to his position. It follows necessarily then, that he who does the simplest kind of work, undoubtedly does it better than anyone else. Labour transmits to its product the value of the means of production consumed by it. Tis the public authority upon the metal that makes it money." (N. Lastly, steam-power, in those agricultural operations in which it can be employed improves, in comparison with horse-power, the quality of the work. If this principle is rigidly adhered to, it follows that the value of labour depends on the quantity of labour employed in producing it — which is evidently absurd. I.Employment in mines of boys of 10 years and upwards. Between 1849 and 1859, a rise of wages practically insignifi- cant, though accompanied by falling prices of corn, took place in the English agricultural districts. The labourers that dwell on the farms of 400-1,000 acres (they are called "confined labourers") are solely employed on such kinds of agricultural work as is permanent, difficult, and carried on by aid of horses. This power must be ap- plied with the average amount of exertion and with the usual degree of intensity; and the capitalist is as careful to see that this is done, as that his workmen are not idle for a single moment. . Chamberlain, Mayor of the town, now (1883) President of the Board of Trade. s. c, pp. The value of the goods annually bought and sold in any country requires a certain quantity of money to circulate and dis- tribute them to their proper consumers, and can give employment to no more. But the people did not wish to go away, and managed even to increase under these circumstances. The labour-time that yesterday was without doubt socially necessary to the production of a yard of linen, ceases to be so to-day, a fact which the owner of the money is only too eager to prove from the prices quoted by our friend's competitors. xvi. Econ., particularly relating to value and to demand and supply." Lond., 1821, p. They also forcibly rooted out, in their de- pendent countries, all industry, as, e.g., England did with the Irish woollen manufacture. As they [the poor] ought to be kept from starving, so they should receive nothing worth saving. In 1867, as consequence of a similar operation, there was a strike of 20,000 men at Preston. Cairnes. 15, 41, 96, 97, 55, 57, 69.— Jacob Vanderlint, as early as 1734, declared that the secret of the out-cry of the capitalists a.s to the laziness of the working people was simply that they claimed for the same wages 6 days' labour instead of 4. Mary Anne Walkley had worked without intermission for 26y hours, with 60 other girls, 30 in one room, that only afforded -j of the cubic feet of air required for them. 66. By expressing the magnitudes of their values in one and the same material, the linen, those magnitudes are also compared with each other. It attains this end by shortening the extent of the labourer's life, as a greedy farmer snatches increased prod- uce from the soil by robbing it of its fertility. representing 3 different working-days of 7, 9, and 12 hours. While he is converting a portion of the means of production into products, a portion of his former product is being turned into mon- ey. On the one hand, the fluctuation up and down of the number of paupers, reflects the periodic changes of the industrial cycle. On the level plain, simple mounds look like hills; and the imbecile flatness of the present bourgeoisie is to be measured by the altitude of its great intellects. But why, then, should "systematic colonisation" be called in to replace its opposite, spontaneous, unregulated colonisation? It is merely a question of extra hands and extra outlay. The weaver has, as a matter of fact, exchanged his linen for a Bible, his own commodity for that of some one else. per hour. Bailey accuse Ricardo of con- verting exchange-value from something relative into something absolute. I can, therefore, express the same rela- tionship by saying, e.g., that the labourer in every minute works 30 seconds for himself, and 30 for the capitalist, etc. 37. Except in so far as they whom his labour enriches, see fit to treat him with a kind of pitiful indulgence, he is quite peculiarly helpless in the matter. They cook for them the first simple food at hand; they also give them the lower part of the papyrus stem to eat, so far as it can be roasted in the fire, and the roots and stalks of marsh plants, some raw, some boiled and roasted. Pol." Paris, 1819, t. The results are record- ed in two voluminous Blue books. is under present circum- stances of great advantage to the family, since it adds that amount of income which . Engels, 1. 3 I. 438 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION SECTION 6.— THE THEORY OF COMPENSATION AS REGARDS THE WORKPEOPLE DISPLACED BY MACHINERY James Mill, MacGulloch, Torrens, Senior, John Stuart Mill, and a whole series besides, of bourgeois political economists, insist that all machinery that displaces workmen, simultaneous- ly and necessarily sets free an amount of capital adequate to em- ploy the same identical workmen. 893.) 40 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION other. The system of protection was an artificial means of manufac- turing manufacturers, of expropriating independent labourers, of GENESIS OP THE INDUSTRIAL CAPITALIST 757 capitalising the national means of production and subsistence, of forcibly abbreviating the transition from the mediaeval to the modern mode of production. What is it that makes such men as Roscher account for the origin of surplus-value, by a mere rechauffe of the more or less plau- sible excuses by the capitalist, for his appropriation of surplus-value? SECTION 2.— THE DETAIL LABOURER AND HIS IMPLEMENTS If we now go more into detail, it is, in the first place, clear that a labourer who all his life performs one and the same simple operation, converts his whole body into the automatic, special- ised implement of that operation. 2 On the 27th April, 1863, Mr. Ferrand said in the House of Commons: "I have been informed by delegates from 16 districts of Lancashire and Cheshire, in whose behalf I speak, that the work in the factories is, in consequence of the improvements in machin- 1 "Reports, &c, for 31st October, 1858," pp. In order 1 K. A range of the working-day from 12 to 14 or 15 hours, night-labour, irregular meal-times, meals for the most part taken in the very workrooms that are pestilent with phospho- rus. 116, 110.) 608 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION that serve for the attainment of particular useful effects, whilst they themselves only gradually wear out, therefore only lose their value piecemeal, therefore transfer that value to the product only bit by bit. Their union into one single productive body and the establishment of a connexion between their individual functions, are matters foreign and external to them, are not their own act, but the act of the capital that brings and keeps them to- gether. Fawcett: "The Economic Position of the British Labourer." Cam- bridge and London, 1865, p. At the same time, it caused and stimulated increased reproduction of wool. The result was a considerable increase in my profits." Ure says of a machine used in calico printing: "At length capitalists sought deliverance from this intolerable bondage" [namely the, in their eyes, burdensome terms of their contracts with the workmen] "in the resources of science, and were speedi- ly re-instated in their legitimate rule, that of the head over the inferior members." Speaking of an invention for dressing warps: "Then the combined malcontents, who fancied themselves impreg- nably intrenched behind the old lines of division of labour, found their flanks turned and their defences rendered useless by the new mechanical tactics, and were obliged to surrender at dis- cretion." With regard to the invention of the self-acting mule, 1 "The relation of master and man in the blown-flint bottle trades amounts to a chronic strike." Hence the impetus given to the manufacture of pressed glass, in which the chief operations are done by machinery. During meal-times they lie at full length in the fields, or watch the boys bathing in a neigh- bouring canal. 4 Thomas Wright: "A Short Address to the Public on the Monopoly of Large Farms," 1779, pp. But if a surplus labouring population is a necessary product of accumulation or of the development of wealth on a capitalist basis, this surplus-population becomes, conversely, the lever of capitalistic accumulation, nay, a condition of existence of the capitalist mode of production. Rep.," p. At first, therefore, the difference is purely quantitative. 519 CHAPTER XVII CHANGES OF MAGNITUDE IN THE PRICE OF LABOUR-POWER AND IN SURPLUS-VALUE The value of labour-power is determined by the value of the necessaries of life habitually required by the average labourer. The silver ornaments are brought out and coined when there is a high rate of interest, and go back again when the rate of interest falls. £7 90 Tithes, Rates, and Taxes, £1 1 Rent 18 Farmer's Profit and In- terest 12 Total, £ 3 11 Assuming that the price of the product is the same as its value, we here find the surplus-value distributed under the va- rious heads of profit, interest, rent, &c. Free labourers, in the double sense that neither they themselves form part and parcel of the means of production, as in the case of slaves, bondsmen, &c, nor do the means of pro- duction belong to them, as in the case of peasant-proprietors; they are, therefore, free from, unencumbered by, any means of production of their own. The second form, B, distinguishes, in a more adequate manner than the first, the value of a commodity from its use-value; for the value of the coat is there placed in contrast under all possible shapes with the bodily form of the coat; it is equated to linen, to iron, to tea, in short, to everything else, only not to itself, the coat. Some of these gentlemen were accused of having kept at work 5 boys between 12 and 15 years of age, from 6a.m. on Friday to 4p.m. on the following Saturday, not allowing them any respite except for meals and one hour for sleep at midnight. This point is to be found at the source of production of the metal, at which place gold is bartered, as the immediate product of labour, for some other product of equal value. m to 7 p. e., his mode of production, and the labour-process itself, must be revolutionised. 1 F. But in order to be able to buy those commodities, he must find them ready in the market. "Spare the hand that grinds the corn, Oh, miller girls, and softly sleep. Amongst the commodities which, in form B, figure as particular equivalents of the linen, and, in form C, ex- press in common their relative values in linen, this foremost place has been attained by one in particular— namely, gold. The Jenny, on the other hand, even at its very birth, spun with 12-18 spindles, and the stocking-loom knits with many thousand needles at once." The number of tools that a machine can bring into play simultaneously, is from the very first emanci- pated from the organic limits that hedge in the tools of a handi- craftsman. . 129, 130.) [For details as to how the present large landed proprietors of Eng- land came into their possessions see "Our Old Nobility. 2 If the accumulation of capi- tal were to cause a rise of wages and an increase in the labourer's consumption, unaccompanied by increase in the consumption of labour-power by capital, the additional capital would be consumed unproductively. 4 Thus the Factory Inspectors at last venture to say: "These objections (of capital to the legal limitation of the working-day) must succumb before the broad principle of the rights of labour... 1 The different quantities of commodities of the same kind, produced in differ- ent countries in the same working-time, have, therefore, unequal international values, which are expressed in different prices, i.e., in sums of money varying according to international values. ch.V.) On the one hand, Adam Smith here (but not everywhere) confuses the determi- nation of value by means of the quantity of labour expended in the produc- tion of commodities, with the determination of the values of commodities by means of the value of labour, and seeks in consequence to prove that equal quantities of labour have always the same value On the other hand, he has a presentiment, that labour, so far as it manifests itself in the value of com- modities, counts only as expenditure of labour-power, but he treats this ex- penditure as the mere sacrifice of rest, freedom, and happiness, not as at the COMMODITIES 47 SECTION 3.— THE FORM OF VALUE OR EXCHANGE- VALUE Commodities come into the world in the shape of use-values, articles, or goods, such as iron, linen, corn, &c. We deal only with the forcible means employed. It is only because the farmer has sold his wheat that the weaver is enabled to sell his linen, only because the weaver has sold his linen that our Hotspur is enabled to sell his Bible, and only because the latter has sold the water of everlasting life that the distiller is enabled to sell his eau-de-vie, and so on. In the hardware manufactures of Birmingham and the neigh- 'Ch. Empl. c, t. "Owing to the men working days and nights in alternate weeks, the men would be separated half the time from their boys, and would lose half the profit which they make from them. . Smith, that which must arise from a different application of what is saved, founded upon a real distinction between the different kinds of labour maintained by it." (Malthus, 1 c, pp. of Insp. The very polarity of these forms makes them mutually exclusive. In the first instance to one another." (1. Accompanied by Mr. Moneybags and by the possessor of labour-power, we therefore take leave for a time of this noisy sphere, where everything takes place on the surface and in view of all men, and follow them both into the hidden abode of production, on whose threshold there stares us in the face "No admittance except on business." Here we shall see, not only how capital produces, but how capital is produced. 1 The guilds of the middle ages 1 "The farmer cannot rely on his own labour, and if he does, I will maintain that he is a loser by it. 114 sqq. 41 45. But in work by the day there is generally an uniform rate ... Face to face with his underselling competitor, he even insists upon extra pay for this over-time. Sailor in the Navy . From the destruction of those Freeholders. He makes what regulations he pleases; he alters and makes additions to his code at pleasure; and if he insert the veriest nonsense, the courts say to the workman: Since you have entered into this contract voluntarily, you must now carry it out... . 8 The self-expansion of capital by means of machinery is thenceforward directly proportional to the number of the work- people, whose means of livelihood have been destroyed by that machinery. Cotton cloth . "The Slave Power," London, 1862, p. 11, p. "The labour of women in the fields," says Dr. Smith, "whatever may be its disadvantages, .... By a Suffolk Gentleman." Ipswich, 1795, p. 2 The parliamentary form of the robbery is that of Acts for enclosures of Commons, in other words, decrees by which the land- lords grant themselves the people's land as private property, decrees of expropriation of the people. Although the unemployed thousands of the East-end did not parade with their black flags en masse, the human torrent was imposing enough. We pre-suppose labour in a form that stamps it as exclusively human. Souvent, dans la prevision d'un travail aleatoire, quelquefois meme imaginaire, on admet des ouvriers: comme on les paie aux pieces, on se dit qu'on ne court aucun risque, parce que toutes les partes de temps seront a la charge des inoccupes." (H. Man's reflections on the forms of social life, and consequently, also, his scientific analysis of those forms, take a course directly opposite to that of their actual historical development. But whether condition or con- sequence, the growing extent of the means of production, as com- pared with the labour-power incorporated with them, is an expres- sion of the growing productiveness of labour. By the 12 working-hours contained in a working-day of 12 hours, which is an absurd tautology. lj-d. The use-value pro- duced by him in one hour, is a definite quantity of yarn. 1,039,724 1,066,260 26,536 Potatoes, tons, 4.1 Turnips, . ii. Machinery, simultaneously with the increasing use of it, in the first decades of this century, appropriated, by degrees, the fabrication of machines proper. The organised group, peculiar to manufacture, is replaced by the connexion between the head workman and his few assist- ants. SECTION 3.— THE PROXIMATE EFFECTS OF MACHINERY ON THE WORKMAN The starting-point of Modern Industry is, as we have shown, the revolution in the instruments of labour, and this revolution attains its most highly developed form in the organised system of machinery in a factory. Or 5 hours and 40 minutes weekly, which multiplied by 50 working weeks in the year (allowing two for holidays and oc- casional stoppages) is equal to 27 working-days." 2 1 I only touch here and there on the period from the beginning of mod- ern industry in England to 1845. The characters that stamp products as commodities, and whose establishment is a necessary pre- liminary to the circulation of commodities, have already acquired the stability of natural, self-understood forms of social life, before man seeks to decipher, not their historical character, for in his eyes they are immutable, but their meaning. The comprehension of this change of form is, as a rule, very imperfect. . In order to 510 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION prolong the surplus-labour, the necessary labour is shortened by methods whereby the equivalent for the wages is produced in less time. Econ.," with his preface to the first edition, in which preface he announces himself as the Adam Smith of his day— we do not know whether to admire more the simplicity of the man, or that of the public, who took him, in good faith, for the Adam Smith he announced himself to be, although he bears about as much resemblance to Adam Smith as say General Williams, of Kars, to the Duke of Wellington. 906.) 4 "Dove e egualita non e lucro." (Galiani, "Delia Moneta in Custodi, Parte Moderna," t. The latter point, the only one that here interests us, is repeated in the Statute of 1496 (Henry VII.). 4 3s. In order to make their work coincide with that of the adult male labourers up to 8.30 p. Therefore, by thus equating the two substances, expression would be given to their chemical composition, while their different physical forms would be neglected. l One sum of money is distinguishable from another only by its amount. and affords an example dangerous to reli- gion, morality, and social order. Constant revolution in production, uninterrupted disturb- ance of all social conditions, everlasting uncertainty and agitation, distin- guish the bourgeois epoch from all earlier ones. this change has been effected by the taking of interest on capital .... So soon, now, as the commodity has been changed into money, the money becomes its transient equivalent-form, the use-value of which equivalent-form is to be found in the bodies of other commodities. 217. The labourer's productive consumption, and his individual consumption, are therefore totally distinct. The detailed analysis of the process will be found in Book II. In one, a married couple, 3 grown-up sons, 1 grown-up daughter, 4 children — in all 10; in another, 3 adults, 6 children. 142: "Seafaring is an art like any other, and cannot, as circumstances require, be carried on as a subsidiary occupation; nay, other subsidiary occupations cannot be car- ried on alongside of this one." If the work, says Plato, has to wait for the labourer, the critical point in the process is missed and the article spoiled, "fpfo'j xaipov SioXXorai." The same Platonic idea is found recurring in the protest of the English bleachers against the clause in the Factory Act that provides fixed meal-times for all operatives. It creates new conditions for the lordship of capital over labour. I ittle thieves are put in the stocks, great thieves go flaunting in sold and silk... And even in the latter case the dial, the springs, and the case, are seldom made in the factory itself. 52, 53.) 1 The peculiar circumstance, that while the ounce of gold serves in England as the unit of the standard of money, the pound sterling does not form an aliquot part of it, has been explained as follows: "Our coinage was originally adapted to the employment of silver only, hence, an ounce oi sil- ver can always be divided into a certain adequate number of pieces oi coin; but as gold was introduced at a later period into a coinage adapted only to silver, an ounce of gold cannot be coined into an aliquot number of pieces Maclaren, "A Sketch of the History of the Currency." London, 1856, p. When the English govern- ment succeeded in suppressing the intestine wars of these "great men," and their constant incursions into the Lowland plains, the chiefs of the clans by no means gave up their time-honoured trade as robbers; they only changed its form. Hence the magic of money. Hoefer, Paris, 1863, p. The cotton that was bought for £100 is perhaps resold for £100+ £10 or £110. If a question be asked them, they never raise their eyes from their work from fear of losing a single moment." The "long stick" is used by the mistresses as a stimulant more and more as the working-hours are prolonged. Simple co-operation is always the prevailing form, in those branches of production in which capital operates on a large scale, and division of labour and machinery play but a subordi- nate part. The slave-owner buys his labourer as he buys his horse. The women now had sufficient leisure to give their infants the breast, instead of poisoning them with "Godfrey's cordial." They had time to learn to cook. 165-167 As to the advantages of large scale, com- pared with small scale, industries, see "Ch. Empl. They frequently build their own houses, and carry to market, at whatever distance, the produce of their own industry. More women and children were compelled by necessitous circumstances, to enter upon laborious occupations, and former workmen were, from the same cause, obliged to devote a greater portion of their time to increase production." ("Essays on Pol.Econ., in which are Illustrated the Principal Causes of the Present National Distress." Lond., 1830, p. He will therefore sell them above their individual but under their social value, say at tenpence each. 770 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION labour-market. About 1630, a wind-sawmill, erected near London by a Dutchman, succumbed to the excesses of the populace. The accidental relation between two individual commodity- owners disappears. Neverthe- less, about 15 years ago, a machine was invented that automati- cally performed 6 separate operations at once. Comm., II. A portion of the instruments of labour acquires this social charac- ter before the labour-process itself does so. 1 Tantse molis erat, to establish the "eternal laws of Nature" of the capitalist mode of production, to complete the process of separation between labourers and conditions of labour, to trans- form, at one pole, the social means of production and subsistence into capital, at the opposite pole, the mass of the population into wage-labourers, into "free labouring poor," that artificial product of modern society. In all of these formulae (II.), the actual degree of exploita- tion of labour, or the rate of surplus-value, is falsely expressed. "The characteristic feature of our modern me- chanical improvements, is the introduction of self-acting tool ma- chinery. . Vol. 2 "Sixth and last Report of the Children's Employment Commission,'* published at the end of March, 1867. 2 The capitalist robs his own self, whenever he "lends (!) the instru- ments of production to the labourer," that is, whenever by incor- porating labour-power with them, he uses them to extract sur- plus-value out of that labour-power, instead of eating them up, steam-engines, cotton, railways, manure, horses, and all; or as the vulgar economist childishly puts it, instead of dissipating "their value" in luxuries and other articles of consumption. The French edition of Cantillon professes in its title to be a translation from the English, but the English edition: "The Analysis of Trade, Commerce, etc., by Philip Cantil- lon, late of the city of London, Merchant," is not only of later date (1759), but proves by its contents that it is a later and revised edition: e.g., in the 556 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION Piece-wage is finally one of the chief supports of the hour-system described in the preceding chapter. THE BUYING AND SELLING OP LABOUR-POWER 173 labour, in other words, half a day's labour is requisite for the daily production of labour-power. to 8.30 p. Ten hours subtracted from twelve, leave two, and it is not easy to see, how, under the given conditions, the surplus-la- bour can possibly be prolonged beyond two hours. In the centres of modern industry— factories, manufactures, ironworks, mines, &c. It follows, then, that the nominal wages, the equivalent of labour-power expressed in money, will also be higher in the first nation than in the second; which does not at all prove that this holds also for the real wages, i.e., for the means of subsistence placed at the disposal of the labourer. The country districts swept of children. As soon as his la- bour actually begins, it has already ceased to belong to him; it can therefore no longer be sold by him. 38, 39.) 1 Thus for instance, Balzac, who so thoroughly studied every shade ot avarice, represents the old usurer Gobseck as in his second childhood when he begins to heap up a hoard of commodities. They work these long hours underground until their 18th or 22nd year, when they are put to miner's work proper (n. c.) 752 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION desperate outrages of the so-called Christian race, throughout every region of the world, and upon every people they have been able to subdue, are not to be paralleled by those of any other race, however fierce, however untaught, and however reckless of mercy and of shame, in any age of the earth." 1 The history of the colo- nial administration of Holland — and Holland was the head capitalistic nation of the 17th century — "is one of the most extraordinary relations of treachery, bribery, massacre, and mean- ness." 2 Nothing is more characteristic than their system of steal- ing men, to get slaves for Java. He will then agree with Sismondi: "that capacity for labour ... 1740.) "Can you see anything that makes a distinction between one class and the other?" "I have not ascertained that, but I know from house to house visitation, that it is a deplorable state of things in our district. The rapid rise of the Flemish wool manufactures, and the corresponding rise in the price of wool in England, gave the direct impulse to these evic- tions. to 9s. Increase of variable capital, in this case, becomes an index of more labour, but not of more labourers employed. THE GENERAL LAW OP CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 635 subsist, and you must do the rest by accommodating your num- bers to the means of subsistence." 1 Capitalist production can by no means content itself with the quantity of disposable labour-power which the natural in- crease of population yields. Besides, to this category belong also such old plantations as those in which the abolition of slavery has completely altered the earlier conditions. "Every man should have at least 800 cubic feet." (Huxley.) 2 According to the English Factory Act, parents cannot send their chil- dren under 14 years of age into Factories under the control of the Act, unless at the same time they allow them to receive elementary education. Once arrived at his destination, "Mr. Peel was left without a serv- ant to make his bed or fetch him water from the river." 4 Unhappy Mr. Peel who provided for everything except the export of English modes of production to Swan River! 1 Wakefield's tew glimpses on the subject of Modern Colonisation are fully anticipated by Mirabeau Pere, the physiocrat, and even much earlier by English economists. Whilst in our example two pieces of a commodity, after subtraction of the value of the means of production consumed in them, are worth 6d. 1861. (Manufacture is used here in the sense of all non-agricultural industries.) 2 This source of relative surplus-population is thus constantly flowing. The same elements of capital which, from the point of view of the labour-process, present themselves respectively as the objective and subjective factors, as means of production and labour-power, present themselves, from the point of view of the process of creating surplus-value, as constant and variable capital. But in presence of such shameful facts as are vouched for in the annexed reports [those of Dr. Hun- ter, Dr. Stevens, &c] a remedy may well be claimed Claims of landlordship are being so used as to do great public wrong. Dr. Ure himself deplores the gross ignorance of mechanical science existing among his dear machinery-exploiting manu- facturers, and Liebig can a tale unfold about the astounding ignorance of chemistry displayed by English chemical manufacturers. 38, n. No; it is very small. 674 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION may in time prove that the whole kingdom will consist of only gentry and beggars, or of grandees and slaves." 1 Nevertheless, the position of the English agricultural labour- er from 1770 to 1780, with regard to his food and dwelling, as well as to his self-respect, amusements, &c, is an ideal never attained again since that time. 1 Professor Rogers, although formerly Professor of Political Economy in the University of Oxford, the hotbed of Protestant orthodoxy, in his preface to the "History of Agriculture" lays stress on the fact of the pauperisation of the mass of the people by the Reformation. s. A may be clever enough to get the advantage of B or G without their being able to retaliate. Repeal of the Corn Laws; 1847 crisis, general reduction of wages by 10 and more per cent, in honour of the "big loaf"; 1848 continued depression; Manchester under military protection; 1849 revival; 1850 prosper- ity; 1851 falling prices, low wages, frequent strikes; 1852 improve- ment begins, strikes continue, the manufacturers threaten to import foreign hands; 1853 increasing exports. F. It has two great mischiefs in it. A given weight of one of the precious metals, an ounce of gold, for instance, becomes officially divided into aliquot parts, with legally bestowed names, such as pound, dollar, &c. Along with the constantly diminishing number of the magnates of capital, who usurp and monopolise all advantages of this process of transformation, grows the mass of misery, oppression, slavery, degradation, exploitation; but with this too grows the revolt of the working-class, a class always increasing in numbers, and disciplined, united, organised by the very mechanism of the process of capitalist production itself. Meyer has shown that the above acknowledgment by Marx wants restricting to some extent. But looking at things as a whole, all this does not, indeed, depend on the good or ill will of the individual capitalist. 4 Le Trosne, therefore, answers his friend Condillac with justice as follows: "Dans une ... When these 400 or 500 girls become colliers' wives, the men suffer greatly from this degradation, and it causes them to leave their homes and drink." (n. India Trade," bring out the capitalist character of division of labour as applied in manufacture more than A. 1 Variable capital, it is true, only then loses its character of a value advanced out of the capitalist's funds, 2 when we view the process of capitalist production in the flow of its constant renewal. The use-value of labour-power, or in other words, labour, belongs just as little to its seller, as the use-value of oil after it has been sold belongs to the dealer who has sold it. In addition to this, economy and judgment in the con- sumption and preparation of the means of subsistence becomes impossible. But the reader may compare the "highly respectable" Cyclopaedia of Agriculture of J. Tucker was a parson and a Tory, but, for the rest, an honourable man and a competent political economist. They are, therefore, not determined by the variations of the absolute number of the work- ing population, but by the varying proportions in which the working-class is divided into active and reserve army, by the increase or diminution in the relative amount of the surplus- population, by the extent to which it is now absorbed, now set free. c, p. 3) Workshops, defined approximately as in the former Act; as for the children, young workers and women employed there, the workshops are about on a par with the non-textile factories, but again conditions are easier in details. 84, n. As a matter of fact, the money in reality represents the quantity or sum of gold ideally expressed beforehand by the sum of the prices of the commodities. 223. . The operating part of the boring machine is an immense drill driven by a steam-engine; without this ma- chine, on the other hand, the cylinders of large steam-engines and of hydraulic presses could not be made. . A man lived here for a little while, with two grown-up daughters and one grown-up son; father and son slept on the bed, the girls in the passage. The greatness of Watt's genius showed itself in the specification of the patent that he took out in April, 1784. It fixed 8 hours a day for children between 8 and 12, 12 hours for children between 12 and 16, &c, with many exceptions which allow night-work even for children 8 years old. This is the negative side. If the vagabond gives a false birthplace, he is then to become the slave for life of this place, of its inhabitants, or its corporation, and to be branded with an S. But however great the progress of English industry had been during the 8 years from 1848 to 1856 under the influence of a working-day of 10 hours, it was far surpassed during the next period of 6 years from 1856 to 1862. or how could this imaginary value have' maintained itself?" But the following shows how little he himself understood about the matter: "Silver was exchanged in proportion to the value in use it possessed, consequently in proportion to its real value. 2 1. In that place, where for more than 400 years laws had been made for the maximum, beyond which wages absolutely must not rise, Whitbread in 1796 proposed a legal minimum wage for agricultural labourers. Gregoir: "Les Typographes devant le Tribunal correctionnel de Bruxelles," Bruxelles, 1865, p. Beyond this limit the working-time is over-time, and is, taking the hour as unit-measure, paid better ("extra pay"), although often in a proportion ridiculously small. A comparison of the writings of Chancellor Fortescue and Thomas More reveals the gulf between the 15th and 16th century. . Once engaged in this process, the machine cannot transfer more value than it pos- sesses apart from the process. 21, 13 710 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION day, Sunday and week day, always the same the year round. 11., p 192. 634 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION they have control, the nearest town or open village receive the evicted labourers: the nearest, I say, but this "nearest" may mean three or four miles distant from the farm where the labourer has his daily toil. This accel- erated relative diminution of the variable constituent, that goes along with the accelerated increase of the total capital, and moves more rapidly than this increase, takes the inverse form, at the other pole, of an apparently absolute increase of the labouring population, an increase always moving more rapidly than that of the variable capital or the means of employment. come se colla mano dell'uomo il glutine di un insetto si trasmuti in velluto ovvero alcuni pezzetti di metallo si organizzino a formare una ripetizione."— Pietro Veri, "Meditazioni sulla Economia Politica" [first printed in 1773] inCus- todi's edition of the Italian Economists, Parte Moderna, t. I shall show in Book III. 5, 11. Rep.," p. If demand and supply balance, the oscillation of prices ceases, all other conditions remaining the same. Compulsory work for the capitalist usurped the 1 "Wretch" is the recognised term in English Political Economy for the agricultural labourer. Franklin, &c," edited by Sparks. —The workmen demand to be paid weekly instead of fortnightly, and by weight instead of by cubical contents of the tubs; they also demand protection against the use of false weights, &c. + £90 var.-f- £90 surpl.; but v+s or £90 var.-f £90 surpl. 1 Nevertheless, the learned professor was not without some benefit from his journey to Manchester. "Reports on Bank Acts," 1857, 2084.) According to a Parliamentary document of 1864, on the gold and silver import and export of India, the import of gold and silver in 1863 exceeded the export by £ 19,367,764. "The agriculturist, after several hours' exposure to wind and rain, gains his cottage to sit by a fire of peat or of balls of clay and small coal kneaded together, from which volumes of carbonic and sulphurous acids are poured forth. The general average (of the cost of each prisoner in the different prisons during the period 1847-1849), has been 63 centimes for all prisons. So also, when based on these methods, do the cheapening of commodities and capitalist exploitation in general. These quantities vary continually, independ- ently of the will, foresight and action of the producers. 4d. Although the gang-master, who, in some districts is called "the driver," is armed with a long stick, he uses it but seldom, and complaints of brutal treatment are exceptional. 16. Useful labour cannot consume these means of production without transferring their value to the new prod- uct, but, to be salable, labour-power must be capable of supplying useful labour in the branch of industry in which it is to be em- ployed. 96 wherein the "happiness" of the English agricultural labourer already in 1770 consisted. The technical and social conditions of the process, and consequently the very mode of production must be revolutionised, before the productiveness of labour can be increased. that em- ploys 100 labourers a day with a rate of surplus-value of 200% or with a working-day of 18 hours, produces only a mass of surplus-val- ue of 600s. Say in the vulgarisation of Adam Smith. F. On a former page we saw that the value of the yarn is equal to the sum of the new value created during the production of that yarn plus the value previously existing in the means of produc- tion. The workpeople are thus continually both repelled and attracted, hustled from pillar to post, while, at the same time, constant changes take place in the sex, age, and skill of the levies. Brit., 1831.) 1 "Where reference is made to labour as a measure of value, it neces- sarily implies labour of one particular kind ... l For the rest, it is a matter of course, that Political Economy, acting in the interests of the capitalist class, has not failed to ex- ploit the doctrine of Adam Smith, viz., that the whole of that part of the surplus-product which is converted into capital, is consumed by the working-class. Not even timber-planting and real forest culture. c, 85, p. 28,010,217 30,387,494 32,000,014 NUMBER OF PERSONS EMPLOYED. Paris, 1821, t. Anderson. The devil himself does his servants inestimable service.... So far as it is a value in use, there is nothing mysterious about it, whether we consider it from the point of view that by its properties it is capable of satisfying human wants, or from the point that those properties are the product of human labour. The fearful increase in death from starvation during the last 10 years in Lon- don runs parallel with the extension of machine sewing. They become recruits of crime. In other words, the production of luxu- ries increases. No attendance of less than 2y hours, nor more than 5 hours on any one day, shall be reckoned as part of the 150 hours. c, p. . On this assumption, labour-power can appear upon the market as a commodity, only if, and so far as, its pos- sessor, the individual whose labour-power it is, offers it for sale, or sells it, as a commodity. Carlisle, Sir B. 2 Capital is dead labour, that, vampire-like, only lives by sucking living labour, and lives the more, the more labour it sucks. . 2 "Capital Farms." Two letters on the Flour Trade and the Dearness of Corn. In England the first form of the farmer is the bailiff, himself a serf. Let us listen, e.g., to the contest between Postlethwayt whose Dictionary of Trade then had the same reputation as the kindred works of MacCulloch and MacGregor to-day, and the author (already quoted) of the "Essay on Trade and Commerce." 1 Postlethwayt says among other things: "We cannot put an end to those few observations, without noticing that trite re- mark in the mouth of too many; that if the industrious poor can obtain enough to maintain themselves in five days, they will not work the whole six. The mechanism of capitalist production and accumulation constantly effects this adjustment. ("Macmi Han's Magazine." Ilias Americana in nuce. In the first place, he clearly enunciates that the money-form of commodities is only the further development of the simple form of value — i.e., of the expression of the value of one com- modity in some other commodity taken at random; for he says — 5 beds=lhouse (xXfvai ttsvts avii oixizq,) is not to be distinguished from 5 beds=so much money. 460.) We here see how India and China avenged themselves on England. 321), which has in no way a tendency to raise wages. In 1844, 2,400 stretches, making a total of 4,800; and in some cases the amount of labour required is even still greater . The interdependent development of the Relative form of value, and of the Equivalent form The degree of development of the relative form of value corresponds to that of the equivalent form. I have only one la- bourer on my farm now. 24. constitutes value." ("Money and its Vicissitudes." London, 1837, p. CO-OPERATION 333 This state of things is in no way altered by the fact that the capi- talist, instead of buying the labour-power of one man, buys that of 100, and enters into separate contracts with 100 unconnected men instead of with one. Petty, has investigated the real rela- tions of production in bourgeois society, in contradistinction to vulgar econ- omy, which deals with appearances only, ruminates without ceasing on the materials long since provided by scientific economy, and there seeks plausible explanations of the most obtrusive phenomena, for bourgeois daily use, but for the rest, confines itself to systematising in a pedantic way, and proclaiming for everlasting truths, the trite ideas held by the self-complacent bourgeoisie with regard to their own world, to them the best of all possible worlds. That is the simple and terrible fact. l In the year 1861 the population alone of the town centres of this industry in Great Britain num- bered 101 ,302. We might therefore just as well say that the buyer performs "strictly an act of production/' by converting stockings, for example, into money. c, pp. If we say that, as values, commodities are mere congelations of human labour, we reduce them by our analysis, it is true, to the abstraction, value; but we ascribe to this value no form apart from their bodily form. living conscious thing, and labour is the manifestation of this power residing in him.) If therefore an article loses its utility, it also loses its value. Compelled by practical necessity, they thus have had to take into account the national difference in the intensity of labour, but this has brought them no loss. A thing can be a use-value, without having value. of yarn, giving, as before, eighteenpence as the price of a pound. Industries compared as regards health. * Turn and twist then as we may, the fact remains unaltered. No less than -^ ths of this value, or 24s., 1 The calculations given in the text are intended merely as illustra- tions. I. 143,996,773 lbs. of Insp. Ounces 28.95 29.63 25.55 24.53 21.24 17.73 Ounces 150.06 152.91 114.49 162.06 100.83 118.06 Ounces 4.68 4.52 3.94 4.23 3.12 3.29 Ounces 183.69 187.06 143.98 190.82 125.19 139.08 5 The general result of the inquiry by the medical commission of 1863, on the food of the lowest fed classes, is already known 1 "Report of the Commissioners ... How now can the produc- tion of surplus-value be increased, i.e., how can the surplus-la- bour be prolonged, without, or independently of, any prolonga- tion of a c? Second- ly, as altering the ratio of the surplus-value to the total capital ad- vanced, i.e., to the sum of the values of the constant and variable capital. The manufacture of one of the means of production is here united with that of the product. while others, of a more practical cast, follow the trade in deer with an eye solely to profit. lxxii., n. m. 137, n. On the other hand, any general expression of value common to all is directly excluded; for, in the equation of value of each com- modity, all other commodities now appear only under the form of 66 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION equivalents. Liverpool employed in the slave-trade, in 1730, 15 ships; in 1751, 53; in 1760, 74; in 1770, 96; and in 1792, 132. 15, 16.) In all Belgium are 930,000 families, of whom, according to the official statistics, 90,000 are wealthy and on the list of voters =450,000 persons; 390,000 families of the lower THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 673 middle-class in towns and villages, the greater part of them con- stantly sinking into the proletariat, =1,950,000 persons. Each circuit is the unity of the same two an- tithetical phases, and in each case this unity is brought about by the intervention of three contracting parties, of whom one only sells, another only buys, while the third both buys and sells. A thing can be useful, and the product of human labour, without being a commodity. The higher wages stimulate the working population to more rapid multiplication, and this goes on until the labour-market becomes too full, and therefore capital, relatively to the supply of labour, becomes insufficient. 15), that is to say the labourer is principally interested in what he receives, the nominal sum of his wages, not in that which he gives, the amount of labour! 2 The effect of such an abnormal lessening of employment is quite different from that of a general reduction of the working-day, enforced by law. A single commodity cannot, therefore, simultaneously assume, in the same expres- sion of value, both forms. Not less than 34,000 persons live there in single rooms. The chevaliers d'industrie, however, only succeeded in supplanting the chevaliers of the sword by making use of events of which they themselves were wholly innocent. c, p. Here, on the contrary, the change of relative magni- tude in the value of labour-power is the result of the change of absolute magnitude in surplus-value. Winslow. and find accommodation for two or three lodgers . On the other hand, the raising of taxation caused by the accumulation of debts contracted one after another, compels the government always to have recourse to new loans for new extraordinary expenses. c, p. are .... He makes use of the mechanical, physical, and chemical prop- erties of some substances in order to make other substances subservient to his aims. Mill, which are neither extensive nor profound, in the domain of Political Economy, will be found mustered in rank and file in his little work, "Some Unsettled Questions of Political Economy," which appeared in 1844. 155, Forster, Addington, Kent, Price, and James Anderson, should be read and compared with the miserable prattle of Sycophant MacCulloch in his catalogue: "The Literature of Political Econo- my," London, 1845. In dry words, the Reglement itself de- clares with true Russian irony that by 12 working-days one must understand the product of the manual labour of 36 days, by 1 day of field labour 3 days, and by 1 day of wood carrying in like manner three times as much. But although ignorant of this, yet he says it. Finally, in the last hour and 12 minutes he produces another 2 lbs. Consumption, the satisfaction of wants, in one word, use- value, is its end and aim. m., without any interval." 1 After these pleasant demonstrations, Capital preluded its revolt by a step which agreed with the letter of the law of 1844, and was therefore legal. By a decree of June 14, 1791, they declared all coalition of the workers as "an attempt against liberty and the declaration of the rights of man," punishable by a fine of 500 livres, together with deprivation of the rights of an active citizen for one year. He can annihilate all regularity of employment, and according to his own conve- nience, caprice, and the interest of the moment, make the most enormous over-work alternate with relative or absolute cessation of work. 743 958 894 805 1,262 1,747 1,145 2,093 2,367 1 "Public Health. It is enough to recall to mind the famine of 1866, which cost the lives of more than a million Hindus in the district of Orissa, in the Bengal presidency. 5 "It is sometimes advanced by way of excuse, when persons are found at work in a factory, either at a meal hour, or at some illegal time, that they will not leave the mill at the appointed hour, and that compulsion is necessary to force them to cease work [cleaning their machinery, &c], especially on Saturday afternoons. However then productive power may vary, the same labour, exercised during equal periods of time, always yields equal amounts of value. Hence there sprang up the extraordinary notion, that the value of gold is estimated in its own material, and that, in contradistinction to all other commodities, its price is fixed by the State. The minders took away the sum of 6s. . Every accumulation becomes the means of new accumulation. It will be sufficient to indicate the most simple of these conditions. B. "Over-population and its Remedy." 1. I further assumed that the operative paid by piece-work, would exert himself to the utmost consistent with the power of contin- uing at the same rate. He must pay higher prices, and is in fact tied to the shop which gives him credit Thus at Horningham in Wilts for example, where the wages are monthly, the same flour that he could buy elsewhere at Is lOd per stone, costs him 2s 4d per stone, ('bixtn Report" on "Public Health" by "The Medical Officer ot the Privy Council, &c 1864 " p 264.) "The block printers of Paisley and Kilmarnock entorced, bv a strike, fortnightly, instead of monthly payment ot wages." ("Reports of the Injectors of Factories for 31st Oct., 1853," p 34.) As a further pretty result of the credit given by the workmen to the capitalist, we may reler to the method current in many English coal mines, where the labourer is not paid till the end of the month, and in the meantime, receives sums on account from the capitalist, often in goods for which the miner is obliged to pay more than the market price (Truck-system). Mary Anne Walkley fell ill on the Friday, died on Sunday, without, to the astonishment of Madame Elise, having previously completed the work in hand. 1 "The limit, however, to the employment of both the operative and the labourer is the same; namely, the possibility of the employer realising a profit on the produce of their industry. Now, if the Factory Acts, owing to their compulsory provisions, indirectly hasten on the conversion of small workshops into factories, thus indirectly attacking the proprieta- ry rights of the smaller capitalists, and assuring a monopoly to the great ones, so, if it were made obligatory to provide the prop- er space for each workman in every workshop, thousands of small employers would, atone full swoop, be expropriated directly! The very root of the capitalist mode of production, i.e., the self- expansion of all capital, large or small, by means of the "free" purchase and consumption of labour-power, would be attacked. The loans enable the government to meet extraordinary expenses, without the tax-payers feeling it immediately, but they necessitate, as a consequence, increased taxes. Who will look after the young children? Oekon." ,p. The pro- portions in which they are exchangeable, whatever those propor- tions may be, can always be represented by an equation in which a given quantity of corn is equated to some quantity of iron: e.g., 1 quarter corn=xcwt. Each of these artific- ers (with the help, perhaps, of one or two apprentices), makes the entire commodity, and he consequently performs in succession all the operations necessary for its production. With the exception of the Venetian monk, Ortes, an orig- inal and clever writer, most of the population-theory teachers are Protes- tant parsons. Since then, every pre- tended obstruction to business has been treated by the Factory inspectors as a mere sham. Those who are not lodged in this way re- ceive in compensation £4 per annum. . For 30 years, however, the concessions conquered by the workpeople were purely nominal. 2 And this is what is called: creating capital out of capital. m., into the 12 hours from 6 a. Consequently, two-thirds of the workmen are discharged. . More men are out of work now where chil- dren and women are employed than formerly." (1. . What the latter really says is, that on the one hand all things which constitute wealth represent the labour that creates them, but that on the other hand, they acquire their "two different values" (use-value and exchange-value) from "the value of labour." He thus falls into the commonplace error of the vulgar economists, who assume the value of one commodity (in this case labour) in order to determine the values of the rest. The wretched half-starved parents think of nothing but getting as much as possible out of their children. For State intervention has falsified the natural economic relations. . It would ei- ther be not saleable at all, or only at something below the average value of labour-power. 3 This is the more absurd as the value of a com- modity is determined not by the quantity of labour actually real- ised in it, but by the quantity of living labour necessary for its production. -. c, p. On the one hand, with the throw- ing of small holdings into large ones, and the change of arable into pasture land, a larger part of the whole produce was trans- formed into surplus-produce. 5 by 8 ft. Such a self-destructive contradiction cannot be in any way even enunciated or formulated as a law. The number of the men condemned to work in coal and metal mines increased enormously owing to the progress of the English factory system; but during the last few decades this in- crease of number has been less rapid, owing to the use of new ma- chinery in mining. II. These meth- ods depend in part on brute force, e.g., the colonial system. prevailed in the 17th century to an extent which, when compared with the extent of the manufacturing system, seems almost incredible. What is lost by the detail labourers, is con- centrated in the capital that employs them. 52. Bentham makes short work of it. This formula is only a popular expression for n^^^m The capitalist pays the value, so far as price coincides with value, of the labour-power, and receives in exchange the disposal of the living labour-power itself. Hence, instead of saying: A quarter of wheat is worth an ounce of gold; we say, it is worth £3 17s. The requisite number of hours is made up each six months, by instalments consisting of from 3 to 5 hours at a time, spreading over, perhaps, the whole six months. If I purchase 2,000 lbs. But this is true only so far as he himself is concerned. The magnates of this trade had not only over- produced beyond all measure during the overtrading time, but they had, besides, engaged in enormous contracts on the specu- lation that credit would be forthcoming to an equivalent extent. * But, when considering the capitalist mode of production, he, on the contrary, treats the work of control made necessary by the co- operative character of the labour-process as identical with the dif- ferent work of control, necessitated by the capitalist character of that process and the antagonism of interests between capitalist and labourer. To this is to be add- ed scanty school furniture, deficiency of books, and other mate- rials for teaching, and the depressing effect upon the poor children themselves of a close, noisome atmosphere. If then the unnatural extension of the working-day, that capital necessarily strives after in its unmeasured passion for self-expansion, shortens the length of life of the individual labourer, and therefore the duration of his labour-power, the forces used up have to be re- placed at a more rapid rate and the sum of the expenses for the reproduction of labour-power will be greater; just as in a machine the part of its value to be reproduced every day is greater the more rapidly the machine is worn out. . He has to share it with cap- italists, with landowners, &c, who fulfil other functions in the complex of social production. That which appears in these fluctuations of wages within a single country as a series of varying combinations, may appear in differ- ent countries as contemporaneous difference of national wages. Dunton. 1866. E.g., the examination of 34 specimens of opium, purchased of as many different chemists in Lon- don, showed that 31 were adulterated with poppy heads, wheat-flour, gum. So far as regards use-values, it is clear that both parties may gain some advantage. Emp. On the other hand, while extending the scale of production, it renders possible a relative contraction of the arena. Both these factors, however, are excluded in the following inves- tigation. The Queen's son is the Princess Alexandra. Polit." t. The variation of the work- ing-day fluctuates, therefore, within physical and social bounds. c. But we have already seen that, with every ad- vance in the use of machinery, the constant component of capital, that part which consists of machinery, raw material, &c, increases, while the variable component, the part laid out in labour-pow- er, decreases. The repetition or renewal of the act of selling in order to buy, is kept within bounds by the very object it aims at, namely, consumption or the satisfaction of definite wants, an aim that lies altogether outside the sphere of circulation. 702 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION Under Schedule D. [for meals]. In the early stages of the circulation of commodities, it is the surplus use-values alone that are converted into money. 8 Of these, 137,447 males. 18,841,326 yds. l Whilst the modern Factory Acts com- pulsorily shortened the working-day, the earlier statutes tried to lengthen it by compulsion. According to this view, a baker whose product lasts only a day, could never extract from his workpeople the same profit, as a machine maker whose products endure for 20 years and more. c, pp. The second volume contains simply statistics. are parts of some lectures given by me on that subject, in 1847, in the German "Arbeiter-Verein" at Brussels, the publication of which was interrupted by the revolution of February. 59. What he really intended to say was this: The manufacturer employs the workman for 11 l l 2 hours or for 23 half-hours daily. Between 1860 and 1865, therefore, the increase in looms was 11%, in spindles 3%, and in engine-power 3%, while the number of persons employed decreased 5-^-%. iv.,p. Our analysis of absolute surplus-value had reference primarily to the extension or duration of the labour, its intensity being as- sumed as given. All the doctors there agree that the increase of the death-rate through tuberculosis, scrofula, etc., increases in intensity with the deterioration of the physical condition of the population, and all ascribe this deterioration to poverty. In this relation the coat is the mode of existence of value, is value em- bodied, for only as such is it the same as the linen. . 1 1 "Products are appropriated before they are converted into capital; this conversion does not secure them from such appropriation." (Cherbu- liez: "Richesse ou Pauvrete," edit. But he falls into the following errors: (1) he looks upon the special conditions under which these laws hold good as the general and sole conditions of capitalist produc- tion. 6d. The working-day is thus not a constant, but a variable quantity. It obtained especially in East Germany. The violations of the Acts became more numerous during the last half year 1863. The value of the yarn is 30 shillings. to 5y P- m -» a D0V worked about four nights every week till children, constant access to plenty of light during the day, and to the direct rays of the sun lor apart of it, is most essential to health. By druggists it is considered the leading article. . The technical basis of that industry is therefore revolutionary, while all earlier modes of produc- tion were essentially conservative. to 2s. If the community's want of linen, and such a want has a limit like every other want, should already be saturated by the products of rival weavers, our friend's product is superfluous, redundant, and consequently useless. Dr. Hunter remarks: "Now these poor must come from somewhere, and as there is no particular attraction, such as doles, at Bad- sey, it must be repulsion from some other unfit place, which will send them here. In ancient civilised countries the labourer, though free, is by a law of Nature dependent on capitalists; in colonies this depend- ence must be created by artificial means." 4 1 1. The weak points in the abstract mate- rialism of natural science, a materialism that excludes history and its proc- ess are at once evident from the abstract and ideological conceptions of its spokesmen, whenever they venture beyond the bounds of their own speciality. August, 1863.) Thus, the bubble of Tory sympathy for the urban workers — by no means for the rural — has burst at last. Yet both are made up of the same chemical substances, carbon (G), hydrogen (H), and oxygen (0), and that, too, in like proportions— namely, C 4 H 8 2 . 676 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION but published the names both of the labouring families ex- amined and of their landlords. All commodities are non-use-values for their owners, and use-values for their non- owners. c, vol. This method of calculation serves the English manufacturer for every-day use; it shows, he will say, that in the 9 first 8 hours, or -« of the working-day, he gets back the value of his cotton; and so on for the remaining hours. The immediate producer, the labourer, could only dispose of his own person after he had ceased to be attached to the soil and ceased to be the slave, serf, or bondman of another. Each man had a big paving-stone for a seat, and he chipped away at the rime-covered granite with a big hammer until he had broken up, and think! five bushels of it, and then he had done his day's work, and got his day's pay — threepence and an allowance of food. MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 413 mons the following statements, supported by documentary evi- dence: "The labour performed by those engaged in the processes of manufacture, is three times as great as in the beginning of such operations. Legislation treated them as "voluntary" criminals, and assumed that it depend- ed on their own good will to go on working under the old condi- tions that no longer existed. . In this place, there- fore, we dwell only on one point, the enormous mortality, dur- ing the first few years of their life, of the children of the oper- atives. c, p. The effect is the same as 2 if these 6-^- lbs. MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 493 of the children of the working-class, that this report lay unno- ticed for 20 years, during which the children, 'bred up without the remotest sign of comprehension as to what is meant by the term morals, who had neither knowledge, nor religion, nor natu- ral affection,' were allowed to become the parents of the present generation." 1 The social conditions having undergone a change, Parlia- ment could not venture to shelve the demands of the Commission of 1862, as it had done those of the Commission of 1840. II., p. Apart from errors in principle, Senior's statement is confused. Thus, a weaving factory is constituted of a number of power-looms, working side by side, and a sewing factory of a number of sewing-machines all in the same building. Technology discloses man's mode of dealing with Nature, the process of pro- duction by which he sustains his life, and thereby also lays bare the mode of formation of his social relations, and of the mental conceptions that flow from them. For the reproduction of this value of four shillings and sixpence, nine hours' labour-time would suf- fice; and consequently three hours of surplus-labour, instead of two, would accrue to the capitalist, and the surplus-value would rise from one shilling to eighteenpence. to E THE GENERAL LAW OP CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 701 PER ACRE, AND TOTAL PRODUCT OF 1865 COMPARED WITH 1864 Table C 1865 Increase or Decrease, 1865 Total Product 1864 1865 Increase or Decrease, 1865 13.0 0.3 12.3 0.2 14.9 1.0 14.8 1.6 10.4 1.9 3.6 0.5 9.9 0.4 13.3 2.8 10.4 1.1 25.2 9.0 1.8 0.2 Qrs. Both extremes have the same economic form. unless he expects to acquire additional value, &c." (Scrope, "Polit. Smith.) This is even a specially wise arrangement of God, according to the gallant and witty Abbe Galiani. It requires for its free play an indus- trial reserve army independent of these natural limits. But if there is as much silver as will transact the small payments independent of gold, the retail trader must then receive silver for small purchases; and it must of neces- sity accumulate in his hands." (David Buchanan "Inquiry into the Taxation and Commercial Policy of Great Britain." Edinburgh, 1844, pp. . cotton 3 1 and 2^7- lbs. In that specification his steam-engine is described, not as an invention for a specific purpose, but as an agent universally applicable in Mechanical Industry. So it is with the instruments of labour. Changes in the methods of production by the subordination of labour to capital, can take place only at a later period, and therefore will have to be treated of in a later chapter. — We have a still more striking example in the facility with whioh the same France was able in 1871-73 to pay off within 30 months a forced contribution more than ten times as great, a considerable part of it likewise in specie. The gipsy fun has vanished here, but according to all witnesses, the payment and treatment of the children is worse. xi, n. It is because all commodities, as values, are realised human labour, and therefore commensurable, that their values can be measured by one and the same special commodity, and the latter be converted into the common measure of their values, i.e., into money. We have further seen that the capitalist buys with the same capital a greater mass of labour-power, as he pro- gressively replaces skilled labourers by less skilled, mature labour- power by immature, male by female, that of adults by that of young persons or children. But the sum of the prices of the circulating commodities depends on the quantity, as well as on the prices, of the commodities. . It can, therefore, be assumed by any commodity. English jurispru- dence, ever the faithful servant of capital, sanctioned in the Court of Common Pleas this piece of pettifogging. 2 Since the quality and intensity of the work are here controlled by the form of wage itself, superintendence of labour becomes in great part superfluous. It is very characteristic that the English Government for years practised this method of "primitive accumulation," pre- scribed by Mr. Wakefield expressly for the use of the colonies. 3 William Cobbett: "A History of the Protestant Reformation," § 471. 3 Modern society, which, soon after its birth, pulled Plutus by the hair of 1 Henry III., most Christian king of France, robbed cloisters of their relics, and turned them into money. Here competition rages in direct proportion to the number, and in inverse proportion to the magnitudes, of the an- tagonistic capitals. 51, 52.) Mr. Molinari, Mr. Molinari! What then becomes of the ten commandments, of Moses and the prophets, of the law of supply and demand, if in Europe the "entrepreneur" can cut down the labourer's legitimate part, and in the West Indies, the labourer can cut down the entrepreneur's? If we are acquainted with nothing but the abstract categories of circulation, which are common to all these modes of production, we cannot possibly know anything of the specific points of difference of those modes, nor pronounce any judgment upon them. The extra labour expended in flax-spinning real- ised itself formerly in extra income to numerous peasant families, or maybe, in Frederick II. 3 The reason is now therefore plain why, in analysing the stand- ard form of capital, the form under which it determines the eco- nomic organisation of modern society, we entirely left out of consideration its most popular, and, so to say, antediluvian forms, merchants' capital and money-lenders' capital. Morning Star, April 17th. i., I will mention one process as an illustration of this diminution in the number of children, wherein by the addition of an apparatus, called a piecing machine, to existing machines, the work of six or four half-timers, according to the peculiarity of each machine, can be performed by one young person (over 13 years) ...the half-time system 'stimulated' the invention of the piecing machine." (Reports of Insp. This last does not mean that simple concentration of the means of production and of the com- mand over labour, which is identical with accumulation. In some cases they now allow an hour, or half an hour for dinner, insisting at the same time, that they are not bound to allow any part of the hour and a half in the course of the factory working-day." 2 The manu- facturers maintained therefore that the scrupulously strict pro- visions of the Act of 1844 with regard to meal-times only gave the operatives permission to eat and drink before coming into, and after leaving the factory— i.e., at home. Now, gen- tlemen, if you compare the working-time you pay for, with that which you do not pay for, you will find that they are to one an- other, as half a day is to half a day; this gives a rate of 100%, and 228 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION a very pretty percentage it is. of yarn are an equivalent for 10 lbs. Payments. of cotton for £110, I have, in fact, exchanged £100 for £110, money for money. Of course, it is also possible, that in G — M — G, the two extremes C — C, say corn and clothes, may represent different quantities of value. Wages, therefore, in reality fell. Yet in this point of view, there is, in my opinion, a very important sanitary context to be added. Further, at that early period, the portion of society that lives on the labour of others is infinitely small compared with the mass of direct producers. It took both time and experience be- fore the workpeople learnt to distinguish between machinery and its employment by capital, and to direct their attacks, not against the material instruments of production, but against the mode in which they are used. Report, Lond 1864, p. Have I not per- formed the labour of superintendence and of overlooking the spin- ner? They are to be tied to the cart-tail and whipped until the blood streams from their bodies, then to swear an oath to go back to their birthplace or to where they have lived the last three years and to "put themselves to labour." What grim irony! In27 Henry VIII. During the 8 years immediately pre- ceding 1864, the excess of imports over exports of the precious metals amount- ed to £109,652,917. 3 (D. iv., p. . So soon as machin- ery sets free a part of the workmen employed in a given branch of industry, the reserve men are also diverted into new channels of employment, and become absorbed in other branches; meanwhile the original victims, during the period of transition, for the most part starve and perish. c, p. (Sismondi, 1. Whatever is useful to this queer normal man, and to his world, is absolute- ly useful. But this is just the case with that minimum mass of gold, which is capable of being replaced by paper money. But in truth, the rate of surplus-value is not equal to =r or —r— but to — : thus it is not 90 90 G c + v v £qq but 5q or 100% , which is more than five times the apparent de- gree of exploitation. Hence the principle, universally applied in this method of production, only to employ the rudest and heaviest imple- ments and such as are difficult to damage owing to their sheer clumsiness. Greek society was founded upon slavery, and had, therefore, for its natural basis, the inequality of men and of their labour-powers. This power is due to co-operation it- self. 8 Even J. 21.) Because the commodity that serves as money is ca- pable of being replaced in circulation by mere symbols of value, therefore its functions as a measure of value and a standard of prices are declared to be superfluous! 1 From the fact that gold and silver, so far as they are coins, or exclu- sively serve as the medium of circulation, become mere tokens of themselves, Nicholas Barbon deduces the right of Governments 'to raise money," that is, to give to the weight of silver that is called a shilling the name of a greater weight, such as a crown; and so to pay creditors shillings, instead of crowns "Money does wear and grow lighter by often telling over... In Basilden, in 1851, 157 per- sons lived on 1,827 acres, in 35 houses; at the end of ten years, 180 persons in 27 houses. "1 look around and not a house is to be seen but mine. A contract for opium was given to a certain Sullivan at the moment of his departure on an official mission to a part of India far removed from the opium district. up to 8 o'clock the next morning ... c, p xxv., n. The result is the reproduction of v plus an increment of v. In the same way the irregularity caused by the motive power in mills that were put in motion by pushing and pulling a lever, led to the theory, and the application, of the fly-wheel, which afterwards plays so important a part in Modern Industry. . 86 2 id., p. It not only stands with its feet on the ground, but, in relation to all other commodities, it stands on its head, and evolves out of its wooden brain grotesque ideas, far more wonderful than "table-turning" ever was. The only difference, therefore, between coin and bullion, is one of shape, and gold can at any time pass from one form to the other. 61-62. But the sale is the first act of a process that ends with a transaction of an opposite nature, namely, the purchase of a Bible; the purchase of the linen, on the other hand, ends a movement that began with a transac- tion of an opposite nature, namely, with the sale of the wheat. In one district stood four THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 691 houses, named birdcages; each had 4 rooms of the following di-» mensions in feet and inches: Kitchen: 9 ft. Coining, like 1 "The prices of things will certainly rise in every nation, as the gold and silver increase amongst the people; and consequently, where the gold and silver decrease in any nation, the prices of all things must fall propor- tionately to such decrease of money." (Jacob Vanderlint: "Money Answers all Things." Lond, 1734, p. Remarks, pp. It is only really useful when it acts on great masses, when a single machine can assist the work of thousands. m. Bailey: "Money and its Vicissitudes," pp. 3 Sooqsiv is a characteristic Greek expression for hoarding. To the wealth of the country it did not the slightest damage. 1 " 6 " (no male 1. Its value, like that of every other commodity, is already fixed before it goes into circulation, since a definite quantity of social labour has been spent upon it; but its use-value consists in the subsequent exercise of its force. THE WORKING-DAY 283 It has been seen that these minutiae, which, with military uniformity, regulate by stroke of the clock the times, limits, pauses of the work, were not at all the products of Parliamen- tary fancy. of Insp. (Hen- ry Brougham: "An Inquiry into the Colonial Policy of the European Powers." Edin. But the latter changes with every variation in the productiveness of labour. 1. Half a window, with glass and frame, had gone the way of all flesh. Yet, in the form of circulation now under consideration, such differences in value are purely accidental. The problem is already solved. If the poets were true, there is no man so hearty, so merry, as the blacksmith; he rises early and strikes his sparks before the sun; he eats and drinks and sleeps as no other man. M. . The two things must therefore be equal to a third, which in itself is neither the one nor the other. To the owner of a commodity, every other commodity is, in regard to his own, a particular equivalent, and consequently his own commodity is the universal equivalent for all the others. c, p. While prices remain constant, the quantity of the circulat- ing medium may increase owing to the number of circulating commodities increasing, or to the velocity of currency decreas- ing, or to a combination of the two. Meantime the need for foreign objects of utility 1 From this we may form an estimate of the shrewdness of the petit- bourgeois socialism, which, while perpetuating the production of commodi- ties, aims at abolishing the "antagonism" between money and commodities, and consequently, since money exists only by virtue of this antagonism, at abolishing money itself. "In one small cellar measuring 1,500 cubic feet . GENESIS OP THE INDUSTRIAL CAPITALIST 753 the alchemists, made gold out of nothing. But although price, being the exponent of the magnitude of a commodity's value, is the exponent of its exchange-ratio with money, it does not follow that the exponent of this exchange-ratio is necessarily the exponent of the magnitude of the commodity's value. These national averages form a scale, whose unit of measure is the average unit of universal labour. The factory hands, especially since 1838, had made the Ten Hours' Bill their economic, as they had made the Charter their political, election-cry. xxxviii, and xxxix ) 1 Fourth Report, &c, 1865, 79, p. They are indeed kept in misery." ("Reasons for the Late Increase of the Poor Rates: or a Com- parative View of the Prices of Labour and Provisions." London, 1777, p. He simply reproduced in his dull way what Helvetius and other Frenchmen had said with esprit in the 18th century. In the paper factories, where the paper is made by machinery, night-work is the rule for all processes, except rag-sorting. . What remains, is the only value that has, in the process of producing the commodity, been actually created. I shall give the analysis of the real 1 In spite of his "Logic," John St. Mill never detects even such faulty analysis as this when made by his predecessors, an analysis which, even from the bourgeois standpoint of the science, cries out for rectification. COMMODITIES 63 a mirror of the linen's value. The more extended the scale of production, the stronger this motive. Thereby the technical foundation on which is based the division of labour in Manufacture, is swept away. And into those wretched habitations (which, even if they adjoin the open country, have some of the worst features of the worst town residences) crowd the agricul- tural labourers of England. The latter thereupon turned in their extremity to the operatives, urs^ed them earnestly to agitate for the 9 hours' system, and promised contributions in money to this end. A. * Gold and silver serve as international means of purchasing [Added in the 4th German edition. The motor mechanism is that which puts the whole in motion. If the production of the average daily means of sub- sistence of the labourer takes up 6 hours, he must work, on the average, 6 hours every day, to produce his daily labour-power, or to reproduce the value received as the result of its sale. We have, therefore, got a double result. For instance, it is a contradiction to depict one body as constantly falling towards another, and as, at the same time, constantly flying away from it. As a commodity, it is a citizen of that world. MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 417 cry, constantly on the increase. 13. Thus "Adam Smith nowhere undervalues the services which the natural agents and machin- ery perform for us, but he very justly distinguishes the nature of the value which they add to commodities ..as they perform their work gratuitously, the assistance which they afford us, adds nothing to value in exchange." (Ric, 1. Courage failed the House of Commons. 3 1 "It is certainly much to be regretted that any class of persons should toil 12 hours a day, which, including the time for their meals and for going to and returning from their work, amounts, in fact, to 14 of the 24 hours.... E.g., the barbarity in the treatment of the paupers, at which the English Press (The Times, Pall Mall Gazette, etc.) have cried out so loudly during the last two years, is of ancient date. Pauperism is the hospital of the active labour-army and the dead weight of the industrial reserve army. In Lancashire the number of mills increased only 4 per cent, between 1839 and 1850; 19 per cent, between 1850 and 1856; and 33 per cent, between 1856 and 1862; while the persons employed in them during each of the above periods of 11 years increased absolutely, but diminished relatively. Hence, with the in- crease in efficacy, extent and value of its means of production, con- sequently with the accumulation that accompanies the develop- ment of its productive power, labour keeps up and eternises an always increasing capital-value in a form ever new." 2 This natural 1 Friedrich Engels, "Lage der arbeitenden Klasse in England," p. 3 The revolution effect- ed by machinery in the juridical relations between the buyer and the seller of labour-power, causing the transaction as a whole to lose the appearance of a contract between free persons, afforded the English Parliament an excuse, founded on juridical principles, for the interference of the state with factories. If each could find an allotment near his work, he would not prefer Badsey, where he pays for his scrap of ground twice as much as the farmer pays for his." The continual emigration to the towns, the continual formation of surplus-population in the country through the concentration of farms, conversion of arable land into pasture, machinery, &c, and the continual eviction of the agricultural population by the destruction of their cottages, go hand in hand. On the other hand, the fetters that this same principle laid on the dominion of capital, fall away. Unable to account for the origin of the puzzling forms assumed by social relations between man and man, people sought to denude them of their strange appearance by ascribing to them a conventional origin. 1 The least important commodities of all for the technological compari- son of different epochs of production are articles of luxury, in the strict mean- ing of the term. "It's a great many hours in a day (6 a. The Indian loom is upright, i.e., the warp is stretched vertically. Gradually it began to serve, within varying limits, as universal equivalent. This crisis was also utilised to teach sewing to the daughters of the workmen in sewing schools. c, p. But what distinguishes the worst architect from the best of bees is this, that the architect raises his structure in imagination be- fore he erects it in reality. The debts due to A from B, to B from C, to G from A, and so on, have only to be confronted with each other, in order to annul each other to a certain extent like positive and negative quantities. Only, in the slave system, the advantage of a labour-power 1 Adam Smith only accidentally alludes to the variation ot the working- day when he is referring to piece-wages. 100 and 130. 429.) 128 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION circulate if not replaced by symbols. Let no man imagine that this lord, poetic into the bargain, is a physician of the school of Sangrado, who as often as he did not find his patient better, ordered phlebotomy and again phlebotomy, until the patient lost his sickness at the same time as his blood. 12.1 Barley, 172,700 177,102 4,402 Barley . It follows therefore that in proportion as capital accumulates, the lot of the labourer, be his payment high or low, must grow worse. How far employment is thereby found for an increased number of men, depends, given the length of the working-day and the in- tensity of labour, on the composition of the capital employed, i.e., on the ratio of its constant to its variable component. . The great debauchery thus produced among these "young immortals" ("Children's Employment Comm., V. The practical agents of capitalistic production and their pettifogging ideologists are as unable to think of the means of production as separate from the antag- onistic social mask they wear to-day, as a slave-owner to think of the worker himself as distinct from his character as a slave. Rep., 1864," pp. t. Again, in proportion to the increasing mass of the means of production, now no longer the property of the labourer, but of the capitalist, the necessity increases for some effective control over the proper application of those means. . In order to labour productively, it is no longer neces- ABSOLUTE AND RELATIVE SURPLUS-VALUE 509 sary for you to do manual work yourself; enough, if you are an organ of the collective labourer, and perform one of its subordi- nate functions. as being the product of one hour, the labourer receives for them a price of 3d. 22, 23). He starts from the for- mer. 1 16 North Street, No. 17 ... i., ch. 3 Whenever these hoards are strikingly above their average level, it is, with some exceptions, an indication of stagnation in the circulation of com- modities, of an interruption in the even flow of their metamor- phoses. Every useful thing, as iron, paper, &c, may be looked at from the two points of view of quality and quantity. In it he assumes the price of wheat to be 8s. You sever the distaff and the plough, the spin- dle and the yoke, and you get factories and poor-houses, credit and panics, two hostile nations, agricultural and commercial." (David Urquhart, 1. Under the name of System of Relays, this "plan" was therefore carried out, so that, e.g., the Departement du Nord— has a paid government inspector been appoint- ed. c. It corrupts even the activity of his body and renders him inca- pable of exerting his strength with vigour and perseverance in any other employments than that to which he has been bred. "This can be account- ed for by the simple fact that, with only being at school for one half of the day, they are always fresh, and nearly always ready and willing to receive instruction. . Let us take the process of circulation in a form under which it presents itself as a simple and direct exchange of commodities. In order to be able to extract value from the consumption of a commodity, our friend, Moneybags, must be so lucky as to find, within the sphere of circulation, in the market, a commodity, whose use-value possesses the peculiar property of being a source of value, whose actual consumption, therefore, is itself an em- bodiment of labour, and, consequently, a creation of value. iii, p. The less time spent in work, the more of that time has to be turned into surplus labour-time. A rise in the price of labour, as a consequence of accumulation of capital, only means, in fact, that the length and weight of the golden chain the wage-worker has already forged for himself, allow of a relax- ation of the tension of it. In fact one class of manufacturers, the spinners of woollen yarn, now rarely employ children under thirteen years of age, i.e., half-timers. 2 Linguet is probably right, when in his "Theorie des Lois Civiles," he declares hunting to be the first form of co-operation, and man-hunting (war) one of the earliest forms of hunting. Hence the result brought about by the circulation of commodities, namely, the replacing of one commodity by another, takes the appearance of having been effected not by means of the change of form of the commodities, but rather by the money acting as a medium of circulation, by an action that circulates commodities, to all appearance motionless in themselves, and transfers them from hands in which they are non-use-values, to hands in which they are use-values; and that in a direction constantly opposed to the direction of the money. On that account, Sir James Steuart, in order to distinguish them from their purely local substitutes, calls gold and silver "money of the world." is reflected in their equally false conception of the international movement of the precious metals (1. 288 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION "Ay, his heart, So says the bond." l This Shylock-clinging to the letter of the law of 1844, so far as it regulated children's labour, was but to lead up to an open revolt against the same law, so far as it regulated the labour of "young persons and women." It will be remembered that the abolition of the "false relay system" was the chief aim and object of that law. It was not till 1758, and this CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO CAPITAL 595 marks an epoch, that a person actually engaged in business was seen with an equipage of his own. Carey, theYan- kee, occasionally performs this conjuring trick with like success, even with the relations resulting from slavery. It is clear, however, that the difference between the labour a machine costs, and the capitalist mode of calculating, which appears, primd facie, absurd, and repug- nant to the laws of the creation of value, will be explained in the third book of this work. E.] EXPORT OF COTTON FROM THE UNITED STATES TO GREAT BRITAIN 1846.-401,949,393 lbs. But in the colo- nies this pretty fancy is torn asunder. The farmer may sell his corn above its value, or may buy the clothes at less than their value. And as with the variable, so it is with the constant capital. 455, 456. Of course the distinction is practically made, since this school treats labour, at one time under its quantitative aspect, at another under its qual- itative aspect. c.,p. 2 SECTION 5.— THE STRIFE BETWEEN WORKMAN AND MACHINE The contest between the capitalist and the wage-labourer dates back to the very origin of capital. Between May and September the work lasts from 5 in the morning till 8 in the evening, and where the drying is done in the open air, it often lasts from 4 in the morning till 9 in the eve- ning. . 3,819,440 7,207,113 Buckwheat, cwts 1,054 19,571 Maize, cwts 5,473,161 11,694,818 Bere or Bigg (a sort of Barley), cwts 2,039 7,675 Peas, cwts 811,620 1,024,722 Beans, , 1,822,972 2,037,137 Total exports 34,365,«01 74,083,351 1 In an appeal made in July, 1866, to the Trade Societies of England, by the shoemakers of Leicester, who had been thrown on the streets by a lock-out, it is stated: "Twenty years ago the Leicester shoe trade was revolutionised by the introduction of riveting in the place of stitching. c, p. . 1864, p. Not even are the bones of saints, and still less are more delicate res sacrosan- cta?, extra commercium hominum able to withstand this alchemy. noussommes d'autant plus riches, nos services productifs ont d'autant plus de valeur qu'ils obtiennent dans l'echange appele production une plus grande quantite de choses utiles." (J. This movement among the Highland proprietors is with some a matter of ambi- tion . Deipnos.) 2 "Accrescere quanto pill si pu6 il numero de'venditori d'ogrii merce, diminuere quanto piu si pud il numero dei compratori, questi sono i cardini 134 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION By the side of the gross form of a hoard, we find also its aesthetic form in the possession of gold and silver articles. . The whole class of workmen that depend exclusively on their skill, is now done away with. Modern fiscality, whose pivot is formed by taxes on the most necessary means of subsistence (thereby increasing their price), thus contains within itself the germ of automatic progression. We have seen that the means of production transfer value to the new product, so far only as during the labour-process they lose value in the shape of their old use-value. c, Petersb edit., 1815, t. On the contrary, the rise in price may be accompanied by a fall in value. Let us live the life of our fathers, and let us rest from work and enjoy the gifts that the Goddess sends us." "Schonet der mahlenden Hand, o Mullerinnen. In the circulation G — M — G, the money is in the end con- verted into a commodity, that serves as a use-value; it is spent once for all. On the other hand, the industrial bourgeoisie foamed with sullen rage at the denunciations of the factory system by the landed aristocracy, at the pretended sympathy with the woes of the factory operatives, of those utterly corrupt, heartless, and genteel loafers, and at their "diplomatic zeal" for factory legis- lation. 3 "There are no two countries which furnish an equal number of the neces- saries of life in equal plenty, and with the same quantity of labour. 2 In the agricultural as well as in the factory districts the consumption of opium among the grown-up labourers, both male and female, is extending daily. 356 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION producer of a commodity is bound to produce a use-value, to satisfy a particular social want, and while the extent of these wants dif- fers quantitatively, still there exists an inner relation which set- tles their proportions into a regular system, and that system one of spontaneous growth; and, on the other hand, the law of the val- ue of commodities ultimately determines how much of its dis- posable working-time society can expend on each particular class of commodities. 1 As the chosen people bore in their features the sign manual of Jehovah, so division of labour brands the manufac- turing workman as the property of capital. Sixth Report, 1864," p. This is co-operation in its most elementary form. L'un en fait une pendant que I autre en fait une autre, et tous contribuent a l'effet qu'un seul homme n aurait pu 328 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION In many industries, there are critical periods, determined by the nature of the process, during which certain definite results must be obtained. They are spinners and weavers; they make soap and candles, as well as, in many cases, shoes and clothes for their own use. But it was only during the decade preceding 1866, that the construction of rail- ways and ocean steamers on a stupendous scale called into exist- 1 Eli Whitney's cotton gin had until very recent times undergone less essential changes than any other machine of the 18th century. Finally, 450,000 working-class families =2,250,000 persons, of whom the model ones enjoy the happiness depicted by Ducpetiaux. This threw, at the same time, an official cloak over British smug- gling. The essential division is, into workmen who are actually employed on the machines (among whom are included a few who look after the engine), and into mere attendants (almost exclusively children) of these workmen. Here, the one stands forth in its character of value by reason of its relation to the other. Purchasers now come up from Glasgow, Manchester, and Edinburgh once ev- ery fortnight or so to the wholesale city warehouses which we sup- ply, and give small orders requiring immediate execution, instead of buying from stock as they used to do. 52.) "By making them masters of their own time (the Factory Acts) have given them a moral energy which is directing them to the eventual possession of political power" (1. This unit, by subsequent division into aliquot parts, becomes itself the standard or scale. ally costs the employer; and considered in this light, labour is in almost all cases cheaper in rich countries than in those that are poorer, although the price of grain, and other provisions, is usuaHy much lower in the last than in the first... xiii.) It is the same in glass-works. While prices fall, and capital is being displaced, the labourers employed in the production of nec- essary means of subsistence are in their turn "freed" from a part of their wages. This is ... He produces values that give fresh command over his labour, and that, by means of such command, create fresh values." (Karl Marx: "Lohnarbeit und Kapital," in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, No. 266, 7th April, 1849.) The articles pub- lished under the above title in the N. Since, further, the ratio surplus working-time, determines the rate of the surplus, necessary working-time, value, the latter is given by the ratio of B G to A B. 2 Eden, 1. But if Englishmen are to be eternal drudges, 'tis to be feared they will degenerate below the Frenchmen. This is seen, not only locally at the points where the efflux of men to towns, mines, railroad-making, &c, is most marked. It is not, therefore, a ques- tion of measuring the value of the piece by the working-time incor- porated in it, but on the contrary of measuring the working-time the labourer has expended, by the number of pieces he has pro- 1 How the existence, side by side and simultaneously, of these two forms of wage favours the masters' cheating: "A factory employs 400 people, the half of which work by the piece, and have a direct interest in working longer hours. Torrens:" Effectual demand consists in the power and inclination (!), on the part of consumers, to give for commodities, either by immediate or circuitous barter, some greater portion of ... 664 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION villages without any sanitary provisions, outside the con- trol of the local boards, very profitable to the contractor, who exploits the labourers in two-fold fashion— as soldiers of industry and as tenants. In some branches of the woollen manufacture in England the employment of children has during recent years been considerably diminished, and in some cases has been entirely abolished. that form the substance of the yarn. f but also managers, salesmen, messengers, warehousemen, packers, &c, in short everybody, except the owner of the factory himself. In that world the productions of the human brain appear as independent beings endowed with life, and entering into relation both with one another and the human race. Considering the social capital in its totality, the movement of its accumulation now causes periodical changes, affecting it more or less as a whole, now distributes its various phases simul- taneously over the different spheres of production. It is quite permissible tor our purpose to assume, that the labour expended on the repairs of instruments is included in the labour necessary for their original production. m., and are en- gaged in making the bread, with one or two short (sometimes very short) intervals of rest, up to 8 o'clock the next morning. For the rest, the pleasant life that the peasant led under Frederick's system of finance and hodge-podge rule of despotism, bureau- cracy and feudalism, may be seen from the following quotation from his ad- mirer, Mirabeau: "Le lin fait done une des grandes richesses du cultivateur dans le Nord de l'Allemagne. c, Vol. On the one hand, because the notion of "means of subsistence" would considerably expand, and the labourer would lay claim to an altogether different standard of life. In tailoring, as well as in weaving, human labour-power is expended. — Ed. MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OF COMMODITIES H7 If, on the contrary, only one phase of the metamorphosis is gone through, if there are only sales or only purchases, then a given piece of money changes its place only once. . This is a great error, as the latter alone make a really important object of national prosperity . All commodities being equated to linen now appear not only as qualitatively equal as values generally, but also as values whose magnitudes are capable of comparison. Moreover, although our weaver's labour may be a recognised branch of the social division of labour, yet that fact is by no means sufficient to guarantee the utility of his 20 yards of linen. a fortnight at the very lowest.'" 1 Such are Irish wages, such is Irish life! In fact the misery of Ireland is again the topic of the day in England. In indus- tries not under the Act, the views of Mr. J. The miser's plan would be far simpler and surer; he sticks to his £100 instead of exposing it to the dangers of circulation. 508 PART Y THE PRODUCTION OF ABSOLUTE AND OF RELATIVE SURPLUS-VALUE CHAPTER XVI ABSOLUTE AND RELATIVE SURPLUS-VALUE In considering the labour-process, we began (see Chapter VII.) by treating it in the abstract, apart from its historical forms, as a process between man and Nature. The number of the labourers and the con- centration of their efforts sufficed. The destruction of this cotton is therefore a necessary condition in the production of the yarn. of Fact., for 31st Oct., 1862," p. To that daily toil there will then have to be add- ed, as though it were nothing, the daily need of walking six or eight miles for power of earning his bread. Upon the arrival of quantities from Spain ... It is one of the great merits of the Physio- crats, that in their Tableau economique they were the first to at- tempt to depict the annual production in the shape in which it is presented to us after passing through the process of circulation. It is the surplus alone that becomes a commodity, and a portion of even that, not until it has reached the hands of the State, into whose hands from time immemorial a certain quan- tity of these products has found its way in the shape of rent in kind. But what "clearing of estates" really and properly signifies, we learn only in the promised land of modern romance, the Highlands of Scotland. The different national wages must be reckoned, therefore, as if that part of each that goes to the State in the form of taxes, came to the labourer himself. We simply get a value of £110, which is in exactly the same condition and fitness for commencing the expanding process, as the original £100 was. THE WORKING-DAY 267 Mutato nomine de te fabula narratur. But in fact, it is capitalistic accumulation itself that constantly produces, and produces in the direct ratio of its own energy and extent, a rela- tively redundant population of labourers, i.e., a population of greater extent than suffices for the average needs of the self- expansion of capital, and therefore a surplus-population. The cheapness of commodities depends, ceteris paribus, on the productiveness of labour, and this again on the scale of production. Just as a number of tools, then, form the organs of a machine, so a number of machines of one kind constitute the organs of the motive mechanism. But, as a matter of fact, the total quantity of the article produced by ma- chinery with a diminished number of workmen, instead of remain- ing equal to, by far exceeds the total quantity of the hand-made article that has been displaced. The smelting furnaces, rolling-mills, &c, the build- ings, machinery, iron, coal, &c, have something more to do than transform themselves into steel. Insp. On the other hand, all labour is the expenditure of human labour-power in a special form and with a definite aim, and in this, its character of concrete useful labour, it produces use-values. . Raw material may either form the principal substance of a product, or it may enter into its formation only as an access sory. At the head of these in importance, stands the self-acting mule, because it opened up a new epoch in the automatic system. II. Tt lasted in the factories 14, 15, or more hours. We now come to the question: How is the labour intensified? 8 and 13. Money, like every other commodity, cannot express the magnitude of its value except relatively in other commodities. Ed. 1821, pp. To say that the supervention of wage-labour adulterates commodity production is to say that commodity production must not develop if it is to remain unadulterated. . Feverishly over-worked in summer, and half-starved in winter, it is no wonder if they say in their peculiar dialect, "the parson and gentlefolk seem frit to death at them." At Floore, instances, in one bedroom of the smallest size, of couples with 4, 5, 6 children; 3 adults with 5 children; a couple with grandfather and 6 children down with scarlet fever, &c; in two houses with two bedrooms, two families of 8 and 9 adults respectively. . Especially within the last twenty or thirty years, the evil has said to be of much less cost to the farmer" [himself very poor].... . 40, where I state that, in the portion of that work that deals with Capital, this problem will be solved: "How does production, on the basis of exchange-value determined simply by labour-time, lead to the result that the exchange-value of labour is less than the exchange-value of its product?" 540 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION works for himself alone, appears as labour for his master. Comm., Second Rep., 1864," p. Similar experiments, and with the like success, were carried out in the mills of Messrs. . THE WORKING-DAY 245 do not get any more for working at night. In so far as the surplus-value, of which the additional capi- tal, No. 1, consists, is the result of the purchase of labour-power with part of the original capital, a purchase that conformed to the laws of the exchange of commodities, and that, from a legal stand- point, pre-supposes nothing beyond the free disposal, on the part of the labourer, of his own capacities, and on the part of the owner of money or commodities, of the values that belong to him; in so far as the additional capital, No. 2, &c, is the mere re- sult of No. 1, and, therefore, a consequence of the above condi- tions; in so far as each single transaction invariably conforms to the laws of the exchange of commodities, the capitalist buying labour- power, the labourer selling it, and we will assume at its real val- ue; in so far as all this is true, it is evident that the laws of ap- propriation or of private property, laws that are based on the pro- duction and circulation of commodities, become by their own inner and inexorable dialectic changed into their very opposite. Machinery, with a few exceptions to be mentioned later, oper- ates only by means of associated labour, or labour in common. Few, even of those whose lives are unusually long, can accumulate great masses of wealth." 2 The labourers most distinctly decline to allow the capitalist to abstain from the payment of the greater part of their labour. * Those small and extremely ancient Indian communities, some of which have continued down to this day, are based on possession in common of the land, on the blending of agriculture and handi- crafts, and on an unalterable division of labour, which serves, whenever a new community is started, as a plan and scheme ready cut and dried. 1,068 672 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION The annual expenditure of the family would cause a deficit upon the hypothesis that the labourer has the food of: The man of war's man fr. who maintain ... Yet, for all that, the conquered were the really cheated. L. 69, 70, 71, 72, 92, 93, and that collected by Sub-Inspector A., Nos. Dr. Aikin (1795) 1. We shall see hereafter, that the "master" can sing quite another song, when he is threatened with the loss of his "living" automaton. In one of the most oppressed agricultural districts of England, Buckinghamshire, the labourers, in March, 1867, made a great strike for the raising of their weekly wage from 9-10 shillings to 12 shillings. The quantity of money requisite to make the payments, falling due on those dates all over the country, causes periodical, though merely superficial, perturbations in the economy of the medium of payment. It ended with the complete ruin of the 300 cot- tage factories. The workpeople told the factory inspector: "We work with more spirit, we have the reward ever before us of getting away sooner at nijtfht, and one active and cheerful spirit pervades the whole mill, from the youngest piecer to the oldest hand, and we can greatly help each other." (1. Hence raw material and auxiliary substances lose the char- acteristic form with which they are clothed on entering the labour- process. Thus the law is not broken; on the contrary, it is merely enabled to operate continuously. Not only are greater quanti- ties of foreign articles of luxury exchanged for home products, but a greater mass of foreign raw materials, ingredients, and inter- mediate products, are used as means of production in the home industries. Here the regulations are brought closer than before to those of No. 1, but there are still several exceptions which favour the capitalists and which in certain cases may be expanded by special per- mission of the Home Secretary. Two conditions must nevertheless be fulfilled. 2 1 Article I. The manufacture is on account of its unhealthiness and unpleasantness in such bad odour that only the most miserable part of the labouring class, half-starved widows and so forth, deliver up their children to it, "the ragged, half-starved, untaught children." 3 Of the witnesses that Commissioner White examined (1863), 270 were under 18, 50 under 10, 10 only 8, and 5 only 6 years old. It usurps the time for growth, development, and healthy maintenance of the body. But, suppose, besides, that the making of the new machin- ery affords employment to a greater number of mechanics, can 1 Ricardo originally was also of this opinion, but afterwards expressly disclaimed it, with the scientific impartiality and love of truth character- istic of him. m. 54.— F. The prelude of the revolution that laid the foundation of the capitalist mode of production, was played in the last third of the 15th, and the first decade of the 16th century. "The Committee believe that the hours of labour are lim- ited by natural laws, which cannot be violated with impu- nity. the manufacturer, who labours four days, has a surplus of money to live idle with the rest of the week .... The 6th section of the Act provided: "That there shall be allowed in the course of every day not less than one and a half hours for meals to every such person restricted as hereinbefore provided." The employment of children under 9, with exceptions mentioned later, was forbidden; the work of children between 9 and 13 was limited to 8 hours a day, night-work, i.e., according to this Act, work between 8.30 p. 177 PART III THE PRODUCTION OF ABSOLUTE SURPLUS- VALUE CHAPTER VII THE LABOUR-PROCESS AND THE PROCESS OF PRODUCING SURPLUS-VALUE SECTION 1.— THE LABOUR-PROCESS OR THE PRODUCTION OF USE-VALUES The capitalist buys labour-power in order to use it; and labour- power in use is labour itself. This is the way in which the engrossing of farms naturally operates. Rept.," p. The value-form must therefore not only express value generally, but also value in definite quan- tity. c, Bd. I., p. 4) very truly remarks: the value produced by an oil mill, after de- duction of all costs, is something new, something quite different from the labour by which the oil mill itself was erected." (1. But it is quite otherwise with regard to the additional capi- tal of £2,000. The working population is little by little decimated as the result of the fall in wages, so that capital is again in excess relatively to them, or, as others explain it, falling wages and the correspond- ing increase in the exploitation of the labourer again accelerates accumulation, whilst, at the same time, the lower wages hold the increase of the working-class in check. 3 Legal limitation of the working-day puts an end to these amenities. iv., v., vi. m. Compare "Reports. They cannot bring their commodities into relation as values, and therefore as commodities, except by comparing them with some one other commodity as the universal equivalent. Supported by his own legal decision, he introduced the system at once into his own factory. Formerly their skilled labour necessarily produced all the parts of engines. 63. "The great advantage of the machinery employed in brick-making consists in this, that the employer is made entirely independent of skilled labourers." ("Ch. Empl. THE WORKING-DAY £85 They denounced the Factory Inspectors as a kind of revolutionary commissioners like those of the French National Convention ruth- lessly sacrificing the unhappy factory workers to their humani- tarian crotchet. These would then simply be more rapidly consumed. Peter only establishes his own identity as a man by first comparing himself with Paul as being of like kind. "The want of servants and labourers was very troublesome to the landed pro- prietors in the depopulated districts. When viewed, therefore, as a con- nected whole, and as flowing on with incessant renewal, every social process of production is, at the same time, a process of re- production. 14-15. — I seize this opportunity of shortly answering an objection taken by a German paper in America, to my work, "Zur Kritik der Pol. The labour, whose utility is thus represented by the value in use of its product, or which mani- fests itself by making its product a use-value, we call useful labour. — "The Hansard version runs: 'Again, and yet more at large — what is human life, but, in the majority of cases, a struggle for existence.* The continual crying con- tradictions in Gladstone's Budget speeches of 1863 and 1864 were char- acterised by an English writer by the following quotation from Boileau: "Voila I'homme en effet. "Cooling" is the techni- cal expression for their occasional escape from the drying-rooms into the fresh air. According to the census of 1861 for England and Wales, we find in the gas industry (gas-works, production of mechanical apparatus, servants of the gas companies, &c), 15,211 persons; in telegraphy, 2,399; in photography, 2,366; steam navigation, 3,570; and in railways, 70,599, of whom the unskilled 1 F. 42.) 559 CHAPTER XXII NATIONAL DIFFERENCES OF WAGES In the 17th chapter we were occupied with the manifold combi- nations which may bring about a change in magnitude of the value of labour-power — this magnitude being considered either abso- lutely or relatively, i.e., as compared with surplus-value; whilst on the other hand, the quantum of the means of subsistence in which the price of labour is realised might again undergo fluctuations in- dependent of, or different from, the changes of this price. of linen =1 coat, it might, for ought that otherwise appears, be pure accident, that these two com- modities are exchangeable in definite quantities. c, ch. 2 Moreover, the formulse II. It is completed in modern indus- try, which makes science a productive force distinct from labour and presses it into the service of capital. If, e.g., the habitual working-day is 10 hours and the daily 3 value of the labour-power 3s., the price of the working-hour is 3-^ d. The total of all the different circuits constitutes the circulation of commodities. Ferguson, the master of Adam Smith, to exclaim: "We make a nation of Helots, and have no free citizens." x But, in spite of the numerous analogies and links connecting them, division of labour in the interior of a society, and that in the interior of a workshop, differ not only in degree, but also in kind. If the day be lengthened by 4 hours, viz., from 12 hours to 16, the proportional magnitudes of surplus-value and value of labour-power, of surplus-labour and necessary labour, continue unchanged, but the absolute magnitude of surplus-value rises from 3 shillings to 4, that of the surplus-labour from 6 hours to 8, an increment of 33-^-%. All raw material is the subject of labour, but 1 "The earth's spontaneous productions being in small quantity, and quite independent of man, appear, as it were, to be furnished by Nature, in the same way as a small sum is given to a young man, in order to put him in a way of industry, and of making his fortune." (James Steuart: "Principles of Polit. The result is therefore the same if he in the one case is employed only for 7 J / 2 , in the other only for 3 hours. The straw cuts their mouths, with which they constantly moisten it, and their fingers. He gen- erally arranges with the latter for piece-work, and his income, which on the average is not very much above that of an ordinary agricultural labourer, 2 depends almost entirely upon the dex- terity with which he manages to extract within the shortest time the greatest possible amount of labour from his gang. of Insp. Instead of being cheapened, the product is made dearer in proportion to the value of the machine. 78.) "Misery up to the extreme point of famine and pestilence, instead of checking, tends to increase popu- lation." (S. 122. II, p. We have therefore to examine first the distinguishing characteris- tics of the forms of the circuits M— C— M and C— M— C, and in doing this the real difference that underlies the mere difference of form will reveal itself. 2 "To subdivide a man is to execute him, if he deserves the sentence, to assassinate him if he does not. It may be resolved into three essentially different stages. Not at all. Barbon, 1. In every case he registers with the dogmatism of a disciple, the confusion of his mas- ter's thoughts. There were eight or nine other boys working last night. The depopulation of Ireland has thrown much of the land out of cultivation, has greatly diminished the produce of the soil, 1 and, in spite of the greater area devoted to cattle breed- ing, has brought about, in some of its branches, an absolute diminution, in others, an advance scarcely worthy of mention, and constantly interrupted by retrogressions. "The 12 corvee days of the 'Reglement organique' cried a Boyard drunk with victory, amount to 365 days in the year." 1 If the Reglement organique of the Danubian provinces was a positive expression of the greed for surplus-labour which every paragraph legalised, the English Factory Acts are the negative 1 Further details are to be found in E. lbs. In the tender annals of Political Economy, the idyllic reigns from time immemorial. 350,252 . The money again leaves me, so soon as I complete this second transaction by a fresh purchase. On the other hand, the value and mass of the means of production set in motion by a given quantity of labour increase as the labour becomes more productive. of barlev- 1 1 meal, 7— d.; 5 lbs. pp. 2 "Toutes les productions d'un meme genre ne forment proprement qu'une masse, dont le prix se determine en general et sans egard aux circon- stances particulieres." (Le Trosne, 1. This practice goes through all the western part of Wiltshire, and, I believe, throughout the country." 2 "For years," exclaims a bourgeois author of that time, "they (the farmers) have degraded a respectable class of their countrymen, by forcing them to have recourse to the workhouse .... Its annihilation, the transformation of the individualised and scattered means of production into so- cially concentrated ones, of the pigmy property of the many into the huge property of the few, the expropriation of the great mass of the people from the soil, from the means of subsistence, and from the means of labour, this fearful and painful expropriation of the mass of the people forms the prelude to the history of capi- tal. In fact these bourgeois economists instinctively saw, and rightly so, that it is very dangerous to stir too deeply the burning question of the origin of surplus-value. m., on another day from 1 p. 550 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION bakers is the cause of the difficulty in getting rid of night-work. 3 One of the most shameful, the most dirty, and the worst paid kinds of labour, and one on which women and young girls are by preference employed, is the sorting of rags. Once in the midst of this world of adventurers, who change their occupation as often as they do their shirt, egad, I did as the others. 250, 251.) - La concen- tration des instruments de production et la division du travail sont aussi inseparables Tune de l'autre que le sont, dans le regime politique, la concentra- tion des pouvoirs publics et la division des inte>ets priv£s." (Karl Marx, I. Its value is, therefore, equal to the average value of one labour-power, multiplied by the number of labour-powers employed. Rep.," p. And just as in society, a general or a banker plays a great part, but mere man, on the other hand, a very shabby part, * so here with mere human labour. But whatever may have been its particular starting-point, its final form is invariably the same — a productive mechanism whose parts are human beings. 1 Paltry as the education clauses of the Act appear on the whole, yet they proclaim elementary education to be an indis- pensable condition to the employment of children. Its apportionment in accordance with a definite social plan maintains the proper proportion between the different kinds of work to be done and the various wants of the community. The Ten Hours' Act, they cried, leaves no other alternative. . If commodities, or commodities and money, of equal exchange- value, and consequently equivalents, are exchanged, it is plain that no one abstracts more value from, than he throws into, circulation. The unpaid labour of the men was made ... . Because the commodity coat here plays the part of equivalent, because the use-value coat, as opposed to the linen, figures as an embodiment of value, therefore a definite number of coats suffices to express the definite quantity of value in the linen. The Factory Inspectors appealed to the Law Courts. 39.) RATE AND MASS OP SURPLUS-VALUE 309 therefore tried to prevent by force the transformation of the mas- ter of a trade into a capitalist, by limiting the number of labour- ers that could be employed by one master within a very small max- imum. 1846.-2,958,457 lbs. Paris, 1826, t. "Iddio af che gli uomini che esercitano inestieri di prima utilita nascono abbondantemente." (Galiani, 1. Here, then, little or no alteration had been en- forced, by authority, in the conditions painted by Engels. Nevertheless under this error lurked a presentiment that the money-form of an object is not an insep- arable part of that object, but is simply the form under which certain social relations manifest themselves. Every commodity, when it first steps into circulation, and undergoes its first change of form, does so only to fall out of circu- lation again and to be replaced by other commodities. Besides the factory operatives, the manufacturing workmen and the handicraftsmen, whom it concentrates in large masses at one spot, and directly commands, capital also sets in 1 Mr. Gillott erected in Birmingham the first steel-pen factory on a large scale. These formulae, supple- mentary the one to the other, are rigorously definite and correct. Its value is expressed only ideally in its price, by which it is equated to its opponent, the gold, as to the real em- bodiment of its value. x b. 52.) 2 See "Theorien von der Masseinheit des Geldes" in "Zur Kntik der Pol. Yearly income over £60 and under £100 238,626 5,015 , 222,575 4,703 m Of the yearly total income 1,979,066 „ 11,321 ,. 1 " 7 27 Ebenezer Street .... On the other hand, the commodity that figures as the equivaleni caunot at the same time assume the COMMODITIES 49 relative form. It is a very cheap sort of sentimentality which declares this method of determining the value of labour-power, a method prescribed by the very nature of the case, to be a brutal method, and which wails with Rossi that, "To comprehend capacity for labour (puissance de travail) at the same time that we make abstraction from the means of subsistence of the labourers during the process of production, is to comprehend a phantom (etre de raison). Rep. The antagonistic character of capitalist accumulation, and therefore of the capital- istic relations of property generally, x is here so evident, that even the official English reports on this subject teem with heterodox onslaughts on "property and its rights." With the development of industry, with the accumulation of capital, with the growth and "improvement" of towns, the evil makes such progress that the mere fear of contagious diseases which do not spare even "respectability," brought into existence from 1847 to 1864 no less than 10 Acts of Parliament on sanitation, and that the fright- ened bourgeois in some towns, as Liverpool, Glasgow, &c, took strenuous measures through their municipalities. The latter, as soon as they are grown up, do not care a farthing, and naturally so, for their parents, and leave them. The money does not vanish on dropping out of the circuit of the metamorphosis of a given commodity. It quite failed at that time of proof when put to the test, and again it will certainly fail should it have to be tried." ("Reports of Insp. . Of course this holds good only so long as the value-relation exists, in which the coat stands in the position of equivalent to the linen. Labour uses up its material factors, its subject and its in- struments, consumes them, and is therefore a process of consump- tion. 376 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION driven by man alone. Now, since relative surplus-value increases in direct pro- portion to the development of the productiveness of labour, while, on the other hand, the value of commodities diminishes in the same proportion; since one and the same process cheapens commodities, and augments the surplus-value contained in them; we have here the solution of the riddle: why does the capitalist, whose sole con- cern is the production of exchange-value, continually strive to depress the exchange-value of commodities? No doubt, the commodity appears here under two different aspects. . (See "Rep. This 24 hours' process of production exists to-day as a system in many of the branches of industry of Great Britain that are still "free," in the blast-furnaces, forges, plate- rolling mills, and other metallurgical establishments in Eng- land, Wales, and Scotland. RE-ACTION OF THE ENGLISH FACTORY ACTS ON OTHER COUNTRIES The reader will bear in mind that the production of surplus- value, or the extraction of surplus-labour, is the specific end and aim, the sum and substance, of capitalist production, quite apart from any changes in the mode of production, which may arise from the subordination of labour to capital. Hence, for one commodity- owner to meet with another who has money, it is necessary, either, that the product of the labour of the latter person, the buyer, should be in itself money, should be gold, the material of which money consists, or that his product should already have changed its skin and have stripped off its original form of a useful object. Sugar (treacle, etc.) varied from 4 ounces weekly for the kid- glovers to 11 ounces for the stocking-makers; and the total average per week for all categories was 8 ounces per adult weekly. Instead of paying for the labour, he only pays the value of the labour-power employed; therefore, the limit to his using a machine is fixed by the difference between the value of the machine and the value of the labour-power replaced by it. In so far then, as its instruments and subjects are themselves products, labour consumes products in order to create products, or in other words, consumes one set of products by turning them into means of production for another set. 5 Reports, &c, for the half year ending 30th April, 1861. To children who are born under its curse, it must often be a very baptism into infamy. Says Mirabeau: "We are only paying attention to the grand manufactories, in which hundreds of men work under a director and which are commonly called manufactures reunies. The surplus-labour would in this case be prolonged only by an overstepping of its normal lim- its; its domain would be extended only by a usurpation of part of the domain of necessary labour-time. 1 Up to this point we have considered men in only one econom- ic capacity, that of owners of commodities, a capacity in which they appropriate the produce of the labour of others, by 1 "Toute vente est achat." (Dr. Quesnay: "Dialogues sur le Commerce et les Travaux des Artisans." Physiocrates ed. Here we cannot reverse the equation, as we can the equation 20 yds. with some love of sport . Let the forests be increased in number and extent during the next quarter of a century, as they have been in the last, and the Gaels will perish from their native soil. They had formed the backbone of Cromwell's strength, and, even according to the confession of Macaulay, stood in favourable contrast to the drunken squires and to their serv- jurist of that time, Sergeant Snigge (later a judge under James I.) for his opinion. But since this applies to every owner, there is, in fact, no commodity acting as uni- versal equivalent, and the relative value of commodities possesses no general form under which they can be equated as values and have the magnitude of their values compared. Duffy, Minister of Public Lands. They become capital, only under circumstances in which they serve at the same time as means of exploitation and subjection of the labourer. capital. The measure of values measures commodities consid- ered as values; the standard of price measures, on the contrary, quantities of gold by a unit quantity of gold, not the value of one quantity of gold by the weight of another. to 9 p. It is, besides, constantly interrupted by the technical progress that at one time virtually supplies the place of new workmen, at another, actually displaces old ones. d. The principle which it pursued, of resolving each process into its constituent movements, with- out any regard to their possible execution by the hand of man, created the new modern science of technology. 60. Courcelle-Seneuil. If this gross product be sold, converted into money, the capital-value regains its original form. Nothing is more characteristic of the spirit of capital than the history of the English Factory Acts from 1833 to 1864. See No. 14, and No. 265, I. With the accumulation of rents in Ireland, the accumulation of the Irish in America keeps pace. Hence, he never comes to see that, if such a thing as the value of labour really existed, and he really paid this value, no capital would exist, his money would not be turned into capital. Without any re- gard to his holiness, Free-trade, the free baking-trade was there- fore placed under the supervision of the State inspectors (Close of the Parliamentary session of 1863), and by the same Act of Parliament, work from 9 in the evening to 5 in the morning was forbidden for journeymen bakers under 18. Are you prepared to recommend legislation which would prevent the employment of children under 12 and 14, whatever the state of their parents might be?" "Yes." (ns. He wanted soldiers for his army and tax-payers for his treasury. 4 I. of Insp. By converting part of his capital into labour-power, the capitalist augments the value of his entire capital. It did not pre- vent Mr. Fawcett saying in the same breath: "The aggregate wealth which is annually saved in England, is divided into two portions; one portion is employed as capital to maintain our industry, and the other portion is exported to foreign countries... In the 16th century, the condition of the labourers had, as we know, become much worse. He knows no change, either in the length of the working-day, or in the intensity of labour; consequently with him there can be 1 "When an alteration takes place in the productiveness of industry, and that either more or less is produced by a given quantity of labour and capital, the proportion of wages may obviously vary, whilst the quantity, which that proportion represents, remains the same, or the quantity may vary, whilst the proportion remains the same." ("Outlines of Political Economy, &c.," p. 897,402 yds. But America's rich silver deposits have so far barely been tapped, and thus the prospects are that the value of this metal will keep on dropping for rather a long time to come. "It is altogether incred- 1 According to a recent calculation, there are yet at least 4,000,000 cannibals in those parts of the earth which have already been explored. Granted this, it follows that the labour-time necessary for the production of labour-power, or for the reproduction of its value, cannot be lessened by a fall in the labourer's wages below the val- ue of his labour-power, but only by a fall in this value itself. This was the result of an unusual exodus of the agricultural surplus-population caused by the demands of war, the vast exten- sion of railroads, factories, mines, &c. But capitalist production begets, with the inexorability of a law of Nature, its own negation. If the intensity of labour were to increase simultaneously and equally in every branch of industry, then the new and higher degree of intensity would become the normal degree for the so- ciety, and would therefore cease to be taken account of. . would be manifestly to their greater advantage All that time and strength wasted; all the suffering from extra and unprofitable fatigue produced to the labourer and to his children; every instance in which the par- ent may have traced the moral ruin of his child to the undermining of deli- cacy by the over-crowding of cottages, or to the contaminating influences of the public gang, must have been so many incentives to feelings in the minds of the labouring poor which can be well understood, and which it would be needless to particularise. Carey tries to prove that the wages of the different nations are directly proportional to the degree of productiveness of the national working-days, in order to draw from this international relation, the conclusion that wages everywhere rise and fall in pro- portion to the productiveness of labour. Smith, 1. The capitalist paid to the labourer a value of 3 shillings, and the labourer gave him back an exact equivalent in the value of 3 shillings, added by him to the cotton: he gave him value for value. The latter is deducible from form B, the expanded form of value, the essential component element of which, we saw, is form A, 20 yards of linen =1 coat or x commodity A =y commodity B. The two poles of the expression of value: Relative form and Equivalent form The whole mystery of the form of value lies hidden in this elementary form. c, p. . Every kind of capitalist production, in so far as it is not only a labour- process, but also a process of creating surplus-value, has this in common, that it is not the workman that employs the instruments of labour, but the instruments of labour that employ the work- man. de Laborde in "De TEsprit d'Associa- tion dans tous les interets de la communaute." Paris 1818. "In the first stone which he [the savage] flings at the wild animal he pursues, in the first stick that he seizes to strBe down the fruit which hangs above his reach, we see the ap- propriation of one article for the purpose of aiding in jthe acquisition of an- other, and thus discover the origin of capital." (R. 492 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION upon the young and the feeble, who are its more immediate objects, but upon the still larger body of adult workers, who would in all these employments, both directly and indirectly, come immediately under its influence. So we find working-days of 8, 10, 12, 14, 16, 18 hours, i.e., of the most different lengths. 2 It will, however, be seen in the following chapter that this law only holds for the form of sur- plus-value dealt with up to the present. I call the former the value-composition, the latter the technical composition of capital. It has now been shown how the various component parts of the value of the product, parts that differ functionally from each other, may be represented by corresponding proportional parts of the product itself. Montagu Valpy describes it, is one of unmitigated slav- ery, socially, physically, morally, and spiritually What can be thought of a town which holds a public meeting to petition that the period of labour for men shall be diminished to eighteen hours a day? Its extent grows, as with the extent and energy of accumulation, the creation of a surplus-population ad- vances. if additional quan- tities of raw material can be worked up without incurring an additional ex- pense for buildings and machinery." (R. If the value of the labour-power be 4 shillings, or the necessary labour-time 8 hours, and the surplus-value be 2 shil- lings, or the surplus-labour 4 hours, and if, in consequence of an increase in the productiveness of labour, the value of the labour- power fall to 3 shillings, or the necessary labour to 6 hours, the surplus-value will rise to 3 shillings, or the surplus-labour to 6 hours. But what we have to do with here, is not the material elements, but the value, of that capital. The sanitary officers, the industrial inquiry commissioners, the factory inspectors, all harp, over and over again, upon the necessity for those 500 cu- bic feet, and upon the impossibility of wringing them out of capital. In order to calculate and compare the areas of rectilinear figures, we decompose them into triangles. c, p. Com. Of course, we do not forget that this new value only replaces the money advanced by the capitalist in the purchase of the labour-power, and spent by the labourer on the necessaries of life. /ap5t7)v laivsfai." 8 "rioM' Y]jucrcct!o !pY«, xaxaiq 8'rjiwnaTo rcdvra." Every Athenian considered himself superior as a producer of commodities to a Spartan; for the latter in time of war had men enough at his disposal but could not command money, as Thucydides makes Pericles say in the speech inciting the Athenians to the Peloponnesian war: "ocoptaai te ItoijioTepoi ol auTo-jpYoi T<5v av»p»iwv rj xpijliaoi ™XepLsTv." (Thuc: 1 , l*c. I wish my own children could have some work as well as play to give variety to their schooling." ("Ch. Empl. For it has not been made for the sake of being exchanged." (Aristoteles, "De Rep.," 1. For him, in fact, his 12 hours' labour is the means of buying the 3s. And there may also be a further gain. I, pp. From that moment the distinction becomes firmly established between the utility of an object for the purposes of consumption, and its utility for the purposes of ex- change. Now he sells wife and child. An increase in the wages of labour does not necessarily imply an enhancement of the price of labour. On this rapidity depends what proportion of the sum of the prices can, on the average, be realised by each single coin. There is here, therefore, an antinomy, right against right, both equally bearing the seal of the law of exchanges. the source whereby the competition was carried on, and continues so to this day.... 44.) But our capitalist still continues to pay as before only five shillings as the value of a day's labour-power. Of every 1,000 persons employed there, 733 are men, 88 women, 135 boys, and 44 girls under 16; in the blast-furnaces, &c, of every 1,000, 668 are men, 149 women, 98 boys, and 85 girls under 16. 2 "Reasons for the Late Increase of the Poor-Rates: or a comparative view of the prices of labour and provisions." Lond., 1777, pp. It rises with rising and falls with falling productiveness. 24,945 St. 1 The data of the text are put together from the materials of the "Agri- cultural Statistics, Trelaud, General Abstracts, Dublin," for the years 1860, et seq., and "Agricultural Statistics, Ireland. Oekon. In order to convert this additional sum of £2,000 into capital, the master-spinner will, all circumstances remaining as before, advance four- fifths of it (£1,600) in the purchase of cotton, &c, and one-fifth (£400) in the purchase of additional spinners, who will 1 "Accumulation of capital; the employment of a portion of revenue as capital." (Malthusf "Definitions, &c," ed. The despotic bell calls him from his bed, calls him from breakfast and dinner. 6, we see that certain cloth- makers took upon themselves to dictate, in their capacity of justices of the peace, the official tariff of wages in their own shops. And why not? If capi- talist production were introduced, the honest fellow would per- haps have to work six days a week, in order to appropriate to himself the product of one working-day. The prolongation of the surplus-labour would cor- respond to a shortening of the necessary labour; or a portion of the labour-time previously consumed, in reality, for the labourer's own benefit, would be converted into labour-time for the benefit of the capitalist. sqq. 1 This portion of value which is added by the machinery, decreases both absolutely and relatively, when the machinery does away with horses and other animals that are employed as mere moving forces, and not as ma- chines for changing the form of matter. But the constant flow towards the towns pre- supposes, in the country itself, a constant latent surplus-popula- tion, the extent of which becomes evident only when its channels of outlet open to exceptional width. of Pol. 1734.) "Why not?" "I think it a more honourable occupation for them in the mills." (n. No. 48,653 Acres. provides shoes and clothing and pays the rent, and thus enables the family to be better fed." 2 One of the most remarkable results of the inquiry was that the agricultural labourer of England, as compared with other parts of the United Kingdom, "is considerably the worst fed," as the ap- pended table shows: Quantities of Carbon and Nitrogen weekly consumed by an average agricultural adult: Carbon, Nitrogen, grains grains England . Oek.," p. But so soon as he completes the process, so soon as he supplements his sale by a purchase, the money again leaves the hands of its possessor. We also saw that at first, the subjection of labour to capital was only a formal result of the fact, that the labourer, instead of working for himself, works for and consequently under the capital- ist. The longer the life of the machine in the labour-process, the greater is that difference. The vendor becomes a cred- itor, the purchaser becomes a debtor. In the ten years during which it regulated factory work, THE WORKING-DAY 281 first in part, and then entirely, the official reports of the factory inspectors teem with complaints as to the impossibility of putting the Act into force. The bodily form of each of these commodities figures now as a particular equivalent form, one out of many. So, too, we pass over any question as to the accuracy of his figures. m. Though the same quantity of labour adds always to its products only the same sum of new value, still the old capital-value, transmitted by the labour to the products, increases with the growing pro^ ductivity of labour. 123, 124, 125, 140, and 54. 181: "If we examine the whole labour-process, from the point of view of its result, it is plain that both the instruments and the subject of labour are means of production, and that the labour itself is productive labour." And in Note 2, same page, we further added: "This method of determining, from the standpoint of the labour- process alone, what is productive labour, is by no means directly applicable to the case of the capitalist process of production." We now proceed to the further development of this subject. . The 15 shillings are by no means the expression in money of all the labour expended in one hour by the 66 men. If what is paid as wages is included, as it commonly is, in the term capital, it is ab- surd to talk of labour separately from capital, The word capital as thus em- ployed includes labour and capital both." (James Mill: "Elements of Pol. 31,210,612 yds. "The authors of this law seem to have been ashamed to state the grounds of it, for [contrary to traditional usage] it has no preamble whatever." 3 By the 16th of Charles I., ch. But the progress of capitalist production not only creates a world of delights; it lays open, in speculation and the credit system, lies) as he who starves a man or utterly undoes him. c, t. The colonial system with its maritime trade and commercial wars served as a forcing-house for it. A Tory says naively: "Formerly the poor demanded such high wages as to threaten industry and wealth. The sporadic application of co- operation on a large scale in ancient times, in the middle ages, and in modern colonies, reposes on relations of dominion and servi- tude, principally on slavery. For that (power) 1 In 1865 this law was improved to some extent. Though he chanted to us the whole creed of the economists, in reality, he says, he would not give a brass farthing for it. The men would not like so well not to have boys under them, as men would be less obedient. 112, squ. He employs one portion of these lly hours, in produc- ing or replacing his wages, and the remaining portion in produc- ing your net profit. He was not killed, but died like other people. These exist quietly side by side, so long as the ratio of the value of silver to that of gold remains unchanged, say, at 15 : 1. It is the old story: Abraham begat Isaac, Isaac begat Jacob, and so on. I., pp. 4, 5. The spindle and cotton, in- stead of resting quietly side by side, join together in the process, their forms are altered, and they are turned into yarn; but their value is no more affected by this fact than it would be if they had been simply exchanged for their equivalent in yarn. over the average of the other five days." ("Rep. At the same period (1832) the total value added to the cotton by machinery and labour in the fine-spinning industry, amounted to about 33% of the value of the cotton. 745 CHAPTER XXX REACTION OF THE AGRICULTURAL REVOLUTION ON INDUSTRY. P. William Petty, the 1 "Sophisms of Free Trade." 7th Ed. London, 1850, p. of Fact, for 31st Oct. x Thus, for instance, in the appendix of my last annu- al report, Dr. Ord, reporting on an outbreak of fever at Wing, in Buckinghamshire, mentions how a young man who had come thither from Wingrave with fever, "in the first days of his illness slept in a room with nine other persons. Hence, in the place of the hierarchy of specialised workmen that character- ises manufacture, there steps, in the automatic factory, a tenden- cy to equalise and reduce to one and the same level every kind of work that has to be done by the minders of the machines; 2 in the place of the artificially produced differentiations of the detail workmen, step the natural differences of age and sex. If the work be complicated, then the mere number of the men who co-operate allows of the various operations being apportioned to different hands, and, consequently, of being carried on simultaneously. Each of the latter had a child while the family was living here, but one went to the workhouse for her confine- ment and then came home, (Jg8 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION (3.) Buckinghamshire 30 cottages— on 1,000 acres of land— contained here about 130-140 persons. It has its immediate origin in the metallic currency. Insp. Moreover, the actual movement of wages presents phenomena which seem to prove that not value of labour-power is paid, but the value of its function, of labour itself. The law, finally, that always equilibrates the relative surplus-population, or industrial reserve army, to the extent and energy of accumulation, this law rivets the labour- er to capital more firmly than the wedges of Vulcan did Prometheus to the rock. . In its turn, this increasing accumula tion and centralisation becomes a source of new changes in the 1 Note in the 3rd German edition. 1859.-961,707,264 lbs. The miners demand almost unanimously an act of Parliament prohibiting the employment in mines of children under 14. 54.) THE WORKING-DAY 301 In the United States of North America, every independent movement of the workers was paralysed so long as slavery dis- figured a part of the Republic. This form quickly disappears in England, to give place to the farmer proper, who makes his own capital breed by employing wage-labourers, and pays a part of the surplus-prod- uct, in money or in kind, to the landlord as rent. Examples are, the irrigation works in Egypt, 1 Lombardy, Holland, or in India and Persia where irrigation by means of artificial canals, not only supplies the soil with the water indis- pensable to it, but also carries down to it, in the shape of sedi- ment from the hills, mineral fertilisers. 1 On the other hand, in order to make up for the loss of time, an expan- sion occurs of the means of production used in common, of the fur- naces, buildings, &c, in one word, greater concentration of the means of production and a correspondingly greater concourse of workpeople. Par le Dr. A. It is self- evident, that if a constant quantity consists of two parts, neither of them can increase without the other diminishing. The small and nimble fingers of little children being by very far the most in request, the custom instantly sprang up of procuring apprentices from the different parish workhouses of London, Birmingham, and elsewhere. Because of their absolute danger to the community, houses in great numbers have lately been destroyed by the au- thorities in Newcastle and Gateshead. See also III. The accumulation and stor- age of skilled labour, that most important operation, is, as regards the great mass of labourers, accomplished without any capital whatever." (Th. Hodg- skin: "Labour Defended, &c, " p. It cannot, however, serve as an example of the first kind of genuine manufacture, for it is a structure produced by modern mechanical industry. At the same time, the capitalistic form of that industry reproduces this same division of labour in a still more monstrous shape; in the factory proper, by converting the workman into a living appendage of the machine; and everywhere outside the Factory, partly by the sporadic use of machinery and machine workers, * partly by re-establishing the division of labour on a fresh basis by the general introduction of the labour of women and children, and of cheap unskilled labour. g94 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION Trent. when it had been returned to him for revision. . It is mere child's-play for it to crush a block of granite into powder, yet it is no less capable of driving, with a succession of light taps, a nail into a piece of soft wood. The two other days I have been here at 6 a. 1 The specifically capitalist mode of production, the develop- ment of the productive power of labour corresponding to it, and the change thence resulting in the organic composition of capi- tal, do not merely keep pace with the advance of accumulation, or with the growth of social wealth. 2 In glove-making and other industries where the condition of the work- people is hardly distinguishable from that of paupers, this does not occur. In the code which the influence of the slave-owners, shortly before the outbreak of the American Civil War, imposed on the territory of New Mexico, it is said that the labourer, in as much as the capitalist has bought his labour-power, "is his (the capitalist's) money." The same view was current among the Roman patricians. Hence the connexion existing between their various labours appears to them, ideally, in the shape of a preconceived plan of the capitalist, and practically in the shape of the authority of the same capitalist, in the shape of the powerful will of another, who subjects their activity to his aims. and II. f p. "Je considere done les machines comme des moyens d'augmenter (virtuelle- ment) le nombre des gens industrieux qu'on n'est pas oblige de nourrir. It cheapens and increases production in that branch which it seizes on, and at first makes no change in the mass of the means of subsistence produced in other branches. . But a watch can; and William Petty used it to illustrate the division of labour in manufacture. declares, that if "des ci- toyens attaches aux m ernes professions, arts et metiers prenaient des delibe- rations, faisaient entre eux des conventions tendantes a reiuser de concert ou a n'accorder qu'a un prix determine le secours de leur industrie ou de leurs travaux, les dites deliberations et conventions ... In the same way with regard to money, every trace of a value-relation disappears in the names pound, dollar, franc, ducat, &c. Bedrooms about 12 feet long and 10 broad, although many are smaller than this. The home, too, will be where shelter can be cheap- est bought; in quarters where commonly there is least fruit of sanitary supervision, least drainage, least scavenging, least sup- pression of public nuisances, least or worst water supply, and, if in town, least light and air. Whether, then, a commodity assumes the relative form, or the opposite equivalent form, depends entirely upon its accidental position in the expression of value— that is, upon whether it is the commodity whose value is being expressed or the commod- ity in which value is being expressed. 1 A. they are reactionary, for they try to roll back the wheel of history. ... Redgrave, Factory Inspector — in the Journal of Arts, 5th January, 1872.) 2 "Rep. At the same time, the money paid for the purchase of the la- bour-power, is converted into necessaries, that are consumed, not by "productive labour," but by the "productive labourer." Adam Smith, by a fundamentally perverted analysis, arrives at the absurd conclusion, that even though each individual capital is di- vided into a constant and a variable part, the capital of society resolves itself only into variable capital, i.e., is laid out exclu- sively in payment of wages. THE LABOUR-PROCESS 181 If we examine the whole process from the point of view of its result, the product, it is plain that both the instruments and the subject of labour, are means of production, 1 and that the la- bour itself is productive labour. They perhaps excused the slavery of one on the ground that it was a means to the full development of another. 8 Numerous instances will be found in "Rep. . It quenches only in a slight degree the vampire thirst for the living blood of labour. Despite this, they fell only in part. l The" combined working-day produces, relatively to an equal sum of isolated working-days, a greater quantity of use-values, and, consequently, diminishes the labour-time necessary for the production of a given useful effect. About 70% of the workpeople examined declared in favour of 10 hours, a much smaller percentage in favour of 11, and an altogether insignificant minority for the old 12 hours. Connected with the illusion mentioned in the text, is the really won- derful dogma, left by him as an inheritance to Political Economy, the dogma, that the price of commodities is made up of wages, profit (interest) and rent, i.e., of wages and surplus-value. It is with him as it is with a conqueror who sees in every new country annexed, only a new boundary. is contained in 20 ibs. Direct force, outside economic conditions, is of course still used, but only exceptional- ly. Those who are worked over-time feel the injustice equally with those who are condemned to forced idleness. . m., and left off about 9 p. The basis of the old meth- od, sheer brutality in the exploitation of the workpeople, accom- panied more or less by a systematic division of labour, no longer sufficed for the extending markets and for the still more rapidly extending competition of the capitalists. With the setting free of a part of the agricultural population, therefore, their former means of nourishment were also set free. The law of gravity thus asserts itself when a house falls about our ears. The labour-time socially necessary is that required to produce an article under the normal conditions of production, and with the average degree of skill and intensity prevalent at the time. It limits the working-day for children from 8 to 13, and for women to 16 hours, between 6 a. Nay, more, his working-day may be prolonged at the same time, so as to make him produce, say 1,400 articles in 14 hours. 4 A classical example of over-work, of hard and inappropriate la- bour, and of its brutalising effects on the workman from his child- hood upwards, is afforded not only by coal-mining and miners generally, but also by tile and brick making, in which industry the recently invented machinery is, in England, used only here and there. of Fact.," 31st Oct., 1848, p. Without a certain de- gree of productiveness in his labour, he has no such superfluous time at his disposal; without such superfluous time, no surplus- labour, and therefore no capitalists, no slave-owners, no feudal lords, in one word, no class of large proprietors. 50. . The legend of theological original sin tells us certainly how man came to be condemned to eat his bread in the sweat of his brow; but the history of economic original sin reveals to us that there are people to whom this is by no means essential. of firing, and something for waste iron to go out of this, which takes off altogether 2%d. Those agents sent to the southern downs of England, to the pastures of Dorsetshire, to the glades of Devonshire, to the people tending kine in Wiltshire, but they sought in vain. 12,680 . . The labourer does not perform two operations at once, one in order to add value to the cotton, the other in order to pre- serve the value of the means of production, or, what amounts to the same thing, to transfer to the yarn, to the product, the value of the cotton on which he works, and part of the value of the spindle with which he works. 2 The towns of Asia Minor thus paid a yearly money tribute to ancient Rome. Of these, 2,195 had only one bedroom (of- ten at the same time used as living-room), 2,930 only two, and 250, more than two. We can see it daily under our very eyes. Suppose the proc- ess of production to be stopped just when the workman has pro- duced an equivalent for the value of his own labour-power, when, for example, by six hours' labour, he has added a value of three shillings. with a rood, or half-acre or acre of land, and facilities for . The particular Equivalent form Each commodity, such as, coat, tea, corn, iron, &c, figures in the expression of value of the linen, as an equivalent, and, con- sequently, as a thing that is value. Formerly they were filled with women and children, now machinery seems to do all the work. See the Westminster Review for example. I long for a stipen- diary magistrate." 3 The crown lawyers declared the masters' interpretation of the Act of 1848 absurd. If, on the one hand, the individual labourers are appropriated and annexed for life by a limited function; on the other hand, the various operations of the hierarchy are parcelled out among the labourers according to both their natural and their acquired capa- 1 "The master manufacturer, by dividing the work to be executed into different processes, each requiring different degrees of skill or of force, can purchase exactly that precise quantity of both which is necessary for each process; whereas, if the whole work were executed by one workman, that person must possess sufficient skill to perform the most difficult, and suffi- cient strength to execute the most laborious of the operations into which the article is divided." (Ch. Babbage, 1. his cottage .... xxix., xxx. Then the value of the labour-power cannot rise from three shillings to four, without the surplus-value falling from three shillings to two; and the surplus-value cannot rise from three shillings to four, without the value of labour- power falling from three shillings to two. In the first place, it becomes necessary that the labour should be carried on under normal conditions. Just as, therefore, in viewing the coat and linen as values, we abstract from their different use-values, so it is with the labour represented by those values: we disregard the difference between its useful forms, weaving and tailoring. In one piece half an hour's labour was absorbed. 1865. Daire et Molinari in the "Melanges d'Econ. Those boys who work in the day sets must take their turn in the night sets also, be- cause the men could not work in the night sets only; it would ruin their health We think, however, that night-work in alternate weeks is no harm. This diminution can never reach the point at which it would threaten the system itself. The so- called Emperor Maximilian re-established it by a decree, which, in the House of Representatives at Washington, was aptly denounced as a decree for the re-introduction of slavery into Mexico. Comm. But the act of equating it to the weaving, reduces the tailoring to that which is really equal in the two kinds of labour, to their common character of human labour. it cannot be doubted that such legislation would have a most beneficent effect, not only 1 "Ch. Empl. Scotland Ireland 1858 . The gang consists of 10 to 40 or 50 persons, women, young persons of both sexes (13-18 years of age, although the boys are for the most part eliminated at the age of 13), and children of both sexes (6-13 years of age). Since the capital produces yearly a surplus- value, of which one part is yearly added to the original capital; since this increment itself grows yearly along with the augmenta- tion of the capital already functioning; since lastly, under spe- cial stimulus to enrichment, such as the opening of new markets, or of new spheres for the outlay of capital inconsequence of newly developed social wants, &c, the scale of accumulation may be suddenly extended, merely by a change in the division of the sur- plus-value or surplus-product into capital and revenue, the re- quirements of accumulating capital may exceed the increase of labour-power or of the number of labourers; the demand for labour- ers may exceed the supply, and, therefore, wages may rise. 31 houses visited, 8 with only one bedroom. Work is no longer done with it, but upon it. x., n. Assuming that labour-power is paid for at its value, we are confronted by this alternative: given the productiveness of labour and its normal intensity, the rate of surplus-value can be raised only by the actual prolongation of the working-day; on the other hand, given the length of the working-day, that rise can be effected only by a change in the relative magnitudes of the components of the working-day, viz., necessary labour and sur- plus-labour; a change which, if the wages are not to fall below the- value of labour-power, pre-supposes a change either in the produc- tiveness or in the intensity of the labour. It therefore follows that the proportional increase or diminution in surplus-value, consequent on a given change in the productiveness of labour, depends on the original magnitude of that portion of the working- 522 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION day which embodies itself in surplus-value; the smaller that portion, the greater is the proportional change; the greater that portion, the less is the proportional change. Polit." Paris Ed., t. Only read Diodorus Siculus. A blunt knife or weak thread forcibly remind us of THE LABOUR-PROCESS 183 Mr. A., the cutler, or Mr. B., the spinner. The masses of capital fused together overnight by centrali- sation reproduce and multiply as the others do, only more rapidly, thereby becoming new and powerful levers in social accumu- lation. ... Now, money has other functions besides this one, and the isolated function of serving as the mere circulating medium is not necessarily the only one attached to gold coin, although this 1 The following passage from Fullarton shows the want of clearness on the part of even the best writers on money, in their comprehension of its various functions: "That, as far as concerns our domestic exchanges, all the MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OF COMMODITIES 129 is the case with those abraded coins that continue to circulate. We found her ill from want of food, lying on a mattress in her clothes, and just covered with a strip of carpet, for all the bedding had been pawned. 36.) 2 "Though the manufacturer" (i.e., the labourer) "has his wages ad- vanced to him by his master, he in reality costs him no expense, the val- ue of these wages being generally reserved, together with a profit, in the improved value of the subject upon which his labour is bestowed." (A. In the same way, if a variable capital of 3s., being the daily value of one labour-power, produce a daily surplus-value of 3s., a variable capital of 300s. . This system, says Commissioner Lord, "seems to combine all the evils of both the 12 hours' and the 24 hours' relays." Children under 13, young persons under 18, and women, work under this night system. In the period of manufacture properly so called, it is, on the other hand, the commercial supremacy that gives industrial pre- dominance. 7. . 1638.) "In what respect?" "In a physical respect." (n. such a one would have the whole world perish of hunger and thirst, misery and want, so far as in him lies, so that he may have all to himself, and every one may receive from him as from a God, and be his serf for ever. Therefore, the common substance that manifests itself in the exchange-value of commod- ities, whenever they are exchanged, is their value. added in the 16th century, a very important element. Petty, "Political Anatomy of Ireland, Verbum Sapienti," 1672, Ed. 1691, p. a week." 2 In spite of legislation, the number of boys sold in Great Britain by their parents to act as live chimney-sweeping machines (although there exist plenty of machines to replace them) exceeds 2,000. 1865.-20,679,111 lbs. of Fact., 31st Oct., 1866, pp. Let us therefore keep within the bounds of exchange where sellers are also buyers, and buyers, sellers. This effect, however, has nothing in common with the so-called theory of compensation. But the conservative interests, which Malthus served, prevented him from seeing that an unlimited prolongation of the working-day, combined with an extraordinary development of machinery, and the exploitation of women and children, must inevitably have made a great portion of the working- class "supernumerary," particularly whenever the war should have ceased, and the monopoly of England in the markets of the world should have come to an end. Since this remain- der plays no part in the formation of value, we may at present leave it on one side. They know well enough that their "close villages" and "show-villages" are the birth- places of the open villages, and could not exist without them. A machine which does not serve the purposes of labour, is useless. The habit of representing surplus-value and value of labour- power as fractions of the value created — a habit that originates in the capitalist mode of production itself, and whose import will hereafter be disclosed — conceals the very transaction that characterises capital, namely the exchange of variable capital for living labour-power, and the consequent exclusion of the labourer from the product. Simpson (paper box and bagmaker, London) states before the commissioners of the Gh. Empl. of Insp. This only we must not forget, that by the side of the newly-formed capital, the original capital continues to reproduce itself, and to produce surplus-value, and that this is also true of all accumulated capital, and the addition- al capital engendered by it. 3 The variety of the trans- ition forms, however, does not conceal the tendency to conversion into the factory system proper. The change must, therefore, take place in the commodity bought by the first act, M— C, but not in its value, for equivalents are exchanged, and the commodity is paid for at its full value. In 1846, the town popu- lation in France was represented by 24.42, the agricultural by 75.58; in 1861, the town by 28.86, the agricultural by 71.14 per cent. The different national uniforms worn at home by gold and silver as coins, and doffed again in the market of the world, indi- cate the separation between the internal or national spheres of the circulation of commodities, and their universal sphere. Had I the courage of my friend, Heinrich Heine, I should call, Mr. Jeremy a genius in the way of bourgeois stupidity. Their experience shows that even if the height of wages corresponds more or less with the average intensity of labour, the relative price of labour varies generally in the inverse direction. . 717 CHAPTER XXVII EXPROPRIATION OF THE AGRICULTURAL POPULATION FROM THE LAND In England, serfdom had practically disappeared in the last part of the 14th century. 12.) This book is very inter- esting. xxxii., "The extension of the rail- way system is said to have contributed greatly to this custom of giving sudden orders, and the consequent hurry, neglect of meal-times, and late hours of the workpeople." (1. The so-called currency school con- cludes from this that with high prices too little, with low prices too much money is in circulation. It forms the guiding star of the merchant or the manufacturer in every undertaking that requires time. 336, 337.) This observation of Ricardo is ol course correct in so far as it is directed against J. It will be remembered that manufacture, properly so called, conquers but partially the domain of national production, and always rests on the handicrafts of the town and the domestic industry of the rural districts as its ultimate basis. We know that the value of each commodity is determined by the quantity of labour expended on and materialised in it, by the working-time necessary, under given social conditions, for its production. With the productive power of labour increases the mass of the products, in which a certain value, and, therefore, a surplus- value of a given magnitude, is embodied. In other words, there is increase in the value and the material mass of the instru- ments of labour, such as buildings, machinery, drain-pipes, work- ing-cattle, apparatus of every kind that function for a longer or shorter time in processes of production constantly repeated, or Or ... He depicts the mass of the American people as well-to-do, independent, enterprising and comparatively cul- tured, whilst "the English agricultural labourer is a miserable wretch, a pauper. 27, n. With the keen eye of an expert, he has selected the means of production and the kind of labour-power best adapted to his particular trade, be it spinning, bootmaking, or any other kind. Hence it furnishes to capital an inexhaustible reservoir of disposable labour-power. The latter never rise propor- tionally to the productive power of labour. Later he found it convenient to suppress the MS. Smith also confounds differ- entiation of the instruments of labour, in which the detail labourers them- selves took an active part, with the invention of machinery; in this latter, it is not the workmen in manufactories, but learned men, handicraftsmen, and even peasants (Brindley), who play a part. We might just as well try to retain Catholicism with- out the Pope. 27, 28.) The fellows in fact were hankering after a rise in wages. 215, 319, 320. Exchange-value and use-value, being intrinsically incommensurable magnitudes, the expressions "value of labour," "price of labour," do not seem more irrational than the expressions "value of cotton," "price of cotton." Moreover, the labourer is paid after he has given his labour. 260-273, passim. Their orig- inal mode of production was based on community of the soil, but not in the Slavonic or Indian form. After this mighty effort of thought, he triumphantly apostrophises Malthus in the words: "Telle est, monsieur, la doctrine bien liee, sans laquelle il est impossible, je le declare, d'expliquer les plus grandes difficultes de l'economie politique, et notamment, comment il se peut qu'une nation soit plus riche lorsque ses produits diminuent de valeur, quoique la richesse soit de la valeur." (1. it is rather a man's dress, and I believe in some cases, it drowns all sense of decency." "Do the women smoke?" "Some do." "And I suppose it is very dirty work?" "Very dirty." "They get black and grimy?" "As black as those who are down the mines ... 1 To the out-cry as to the physical and mental degradation, the pre- mature death, the torture of over-work, it answers: Ought these to trouble us since they increase our profits? From his point of view, the labour- process is nothing more than the consumption of the commodity purchased, i.e., of labour-power; but this consumption cannot be effected except by supplying the labour-power with the means of production. The labourer therefore finds, in the work- shop, the means of production necessary for working, not only during six, but during twelve hours. The advance of capitalist production develops a working-class, which by education, tra- dition, habit, looks upon the conditions of that mode of produc- tion as self-evident laws of Nature. 6,297,554 yds. Your reason? and it rises to 22s., that is a rise of 10 per cent.; but if it is only 7s. This proposal many High- land proprietors have effected in their own country against their own coun- trymen." (George Ensor: "An Inquiry Concerning the Population of Nations." Lond., 1818, pp. 1 was firmly convinced that I was fit for nothing but letter-press printing. Rep.," p. In this case, as in all cases of measuring quantities of the same denomination, the establishment of an unvarying unit of measure is all-important. 1 For this reason, we can speak of the coat-value of the linen when its value is expressed in coats, or of its corn-value when expressed in corn, and so on. "Several successive acts of exchange have only made the last represent the first" (Sismondi, "Nouveaux Principes, etc.," p. we get very differently, 6 hours surplus-labour Surplus-value of 3 sh. Paris, t. 43, n. But the opposition is not nearly so pleasant, and is far more capable of crystallisation. 30, sqq. If, on the other hand, the necessary labour=6 hours and the surplus-labour=6 hours, the degree of exploitation remains, as before, 100% , while the actual amount of exploitation has increased 20%, namely from five hours to six. Thus were the agricultural people, first forcibly expropriated from the soil, driven from their homes, turned into vagabonds, and then whipped, branded, tortured by laws grotesquely terri- ble, into the discipline necessary for the wage system. Of all the great motors handed down from the manufacturing period, horse-power is the worst, partly because a horse has a head of his own, partly be- cause he is costly, and the extent to which he is applicable in factories is very restricted. . If the foreign trade, forced upon Japan by Europeans, should lead to the substitution of money rents for rents in kind, it will be all up with the exemplary agriculture of that country. "Textbook of Lectures," &c, pp. The whole of the labour in the yarn is past la- bour; and it is a matter of no importance that the operations nec- essary for the production of its constituent elements were car- ried on at times which, referred to the present, are more remote than the final operation of spinning. MACHINERY AMD MODERN INDUSTRY 421 To work at a machine, the workman should be taught from childhood, in order that he may learn to adapt his own move- ments to the uniform and unceasing motion of an automaton. But "the rice-grounds of Geor- gia, or the swamps of the Mississippi may be fatally injurious to the human constitution; but the waste of human life which the cultivation of these districts necessitates, is not so great that it cannot be repaired from the teeming preserves of Virginia and Kentucky. The buckets work alternately; when money is scarce, bullion is coined; when bullion is scarce, money is melted." (Sir D. . His report, 2 together with the evidence given, roused not the heart of the public but its stomach. For example — "Once admit that A tails, because B, with which, it is exchanged, rises, while no less labour is bestowed in the mean-' time on A, and your general principle of value falls to the ground.... (Law of 18th March, 1851.) "No minor who has attained the age of 12 years, and is under the age of 15 years, shall be employed in any manufacturing establishment more than 11 hours in any one day, nor before 5 o'clock in the morning, nor after 7.30 in the evening " ("Revised Statutes of the State of Rhode Island," &c, ch. "Why did he live here? In the continuous and unvarying process of glazing are found girls of 12 who work the whole month 14 hours a day, "without any regular relief or cessation beyond 2 or, at most, 3 breaks of half an hour each for meals." In some mills, where regular night-work has been entire- ly given up, over-work goes on to a terrible extent, "and that often in the dirtiest, and in the hottest, and in the most monotonous of the various processes." ("Ch. Employment Comm. vi. "In the economy of a nation, advantages and evils always balance one another (il bene ed il male economico in una nazione sempre all, istessa mi- sura): the abundance of wealth with some people, is always equal to the want of it with others (la copia dei beni in alcuni sempre eguale alia mancanza di essi in altri): the great riches of a small number are always accompanied by the absolute privation of the first necessaries of life for many others. Many of these colossal hammers strike seventy times in a minute, and Ryder's patent machine for forging spindles with small hammers gives as many as 700 strokes per minute. Fact, for 31st October, 1858," p. This point coincides with the birth of capital itself. Vulgar economy which, indeed, "has really learnt nothing," here as everywhere sticks to appearances in opposition to the law which regulates and explains them. The soil (and this, economically speaking, includes water) in the virgin state in which it supplies 1 man with necessaries or the means of subsistence ready to hand, exists independently of him, and is the universal subject of human labour. A greater number of labour- ers working together, at the same time, in one place (or, if you will, in the same field of labour), in order to produce the same sort of commodity under the mastership of one capitalist, constitutes, both historically and logically, the starting-point of capitalist production. Empl. Yet this is the dogma of the economists. From their fifth year and often earlier, until their twelfth or fifteenth year, the children work in these schools; during the first year the very young ones work from four to eight hours, and later on, from six in the morning till eight and ten o'clock at night. 3,865,990 ts. Here, we have nothing more to do with the quality, the na- ture and the specific character of the labour, but merely with its quantity. Since, however, the addition of new value to the subject of his labour, and the pres- ervation of its former value, are two entirely distinct results, produced simultaneously by the labourer, during one operation, it is plain that this two-fold nature of the result can be explained only by the two-fold nature of his labour; at one and the same time, it must in one character create value, and in another charac- ter preserve or transfer value. 6. 8 1. 86-97, and pp. It creates, on the one hand, new condi- tions by which capital is enabled to give free scope to this its constant tendency, and on the other hand, new motives with which to whet capital's appetite for the labour of others. A given working-day, therefore, no longer creates a constant, but a variable value; in a day of 12 hours of ordinary intensity, the value created is, say 6 shillings, but with increased intensity, the value created may be 7, 8, or more shillings. * (2.) Lengthening of the working-day. During the last 5 years, the diminution of the agricultural percentage of the population has been yet more marked. (11.) Wiltshire Stratton. But the capitalist may safely leave its fulfilment to the labourer's instincts of self-preservation and of propagation. Of the same nature are the statute of Charles V. 2 So far no chemist has ever discovered exchange-value either in a pearl or a diamond. An organised system of machines, to which motion is com- municated by the transmitting mechanism from a central auto- maton, is the most developed form of production by machinery. Despite the doubled productiveness of labour, the day's labour creates, as before, a new value of six shillings and no more, which, however, is now spread over twice as many articles. some of them have been out of work for weeks just in consequence of the bad state of the ventilation where there is not explosive gas . We are resolved to put forth all our strength until this glorious result is attained." 1 At the same time, the Congress of the International Working Men's Association at Geneva, on the proposition of the London General Council, resolved that "the limitation of the working-day is a preliminary condition without which all further attempts at improvement and emancipation must prove abortive . An Act of 1533 recites that some owners possess 24,000 sheep, and limits the number to be owned to 2,00c). The value of the new product further includes: the equivalent of the value of the labour-power together with a surplus-value. This growth, however, is conditioned by the ebb and flow of the industrial cycle. If the linen, or any other commodity serving as universal equivalent, 1 It is by no means self-evident that this character of direct and uni- versal exchangeability is, so to speak, a polar one, and as intimately con- nected with its opposite pole, the absence of direct exchangeability, as the positive pole of the magnet is with its negative counterpart. A most atrocious instance had been brought before the Court of King's Bench two years before, in which a number of these boys, apprenticed by a parish in Lon- don to one manufacturer, had been transferred to another, and had been found by some benevolent persons in a state of absolute famine. Some of the hands always work in the night, without any alterna- tion of day and night work We do not find any differ- ence in the health of those who work regularly by night and those who work by day, and probably people can sleep better if they have the same period of rest than if it is changed About 20 of the boys under the age of 18 work in the night sets. 1865.-445,947,600 lbs. 1832, pp. 3,301,683 . Hence if the number of moves made by the separate pieces increase, the total number of those pieces in cir- culation diminishes. In Manufacture the isolation of each de- tail process is a condition imposed by the nature of division of labour, but in the fully developed factory the continuity of thoso processes is, on the contrary, imperative. 520 we obtain the following laws: (1.) The working-day creates a greater or less amount of value in proportion to its length — thus, a variable and not a constant quantity of value. 1 Public meeting of agricultural labourers at Lasswade, near Edinburgh, January 5th, 1866. * But while upsetting 1 "You divide the people into two hostile camps of clownish boors and emasculated dwarfs. No one can sell unless some one else purchases. carefully watch the price of the raw material and the price of manufactured goods, and are thus enabled to form an accu- rate estimate of their master's profits." 1 The capitalist rightly knocks on the head such pretensions as gross errors as to the nature of wage-labour. There is no difference or distinction in things of equal value.... As the system of protection at its origin 2 attempted to manufacture capitalists artificially in the mother-country, so Wakefield's colonisation theory, which England tried for a time to enforce by Acts of Parliament, at- tempted to effect the manufacture of wage-workers in the Colonies. As the person who makes a sale, he is a seller; as the person who makes a purchase, he is a buyer. In Prussia it is 157. daily. Except in the periods of prosperity, there rages between the capitalists the most furious combat for the share of each in the markets. 137. The fact that the detail labourer produces no com- modities. There, then, people- go into the forests, and cut bread for themselves, just as with us they cut fire-wood." 2 Suppose now such an eastern bread-cutter- requires 12 working-hours a week for the satisfaction of all his wants. Econ.," &.c. 322.) Most recently a much more striking example offers. The Act has improved the venti- lation very much." 2 At the same time, this portion of the Act 1 1. 59, 60.) AlacCulloch in "The Litera- ture of Political Economy, a classified catalogue, Lond. Insp. It is well known that Great Britain, apart from its own immense store of rags, is the emporium for the rag trade of the whole world. The hour of vulgar economy had struck. — -r f = V ft 1 it» oi course, loses all mean- Working-day oi a given number ot hours ' ing as soon as the working-day ceases to contain a definite number of hours. On the same day The Times reports another case. 6d. 386 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION hammers are an invention of Nasmyth, and there is one that weighs over 6 tons and strikes with a vertical fall of 7 feet, on an anvil weighing 36 tons. If, therefore, on the one hand, it presents itself historically as a progress and as a neces- sary phase in the economic development of society, on the other hand, it is a refined and civilised method of exploitation. The ratio between the two metals was then again altered by law, but the new nominal MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OP COMMODITIES 97 Commodities with definite prices present themselves under the form: a commodity A=x gold; b commodity B =z gold; c commodity C=y gold, &c, where a, b, c, represent definite quantities of the commodities A, B, G and x, z, y, definite quan- tities of gold. To purchase the labour- power of a family of four workers may, perhaps, cost more than it formerly did to purchase the labour-power of the head of the family, but, in return, four days' labour takes the place of one, and their price falls in proportion to the excess of the surplus-labour of four over the surplus-labour of one. Be- sides they, with the rest of the peasants, enjoyed the usufruct of the common land, which gave pasture to their cattle, furnished them with timber, fire-wood, turf, &c. 2 Reports, &c, 30th April, 1858, p. 54.) "The Proletarian, by selling his labour for a definite quantity of the necessaries of life, renounces all claim to a share in the product. If the time socially necessary for the pro- duction of any commodity alters— and a given weight of cotton represents, after a bad harvest, more labour than after a good one — all previously existing commodities of the same class are affected, because they are, as it were, only individuals of the species, * and their value at any given time is measured by the labour socially necessary, i.e., by the labour necessary for their production under the then existing social conditions. The negligence of the employes is the cause of the mis- fortune. With its fall these were no longer tenable. What this, you gods? Econ.,"edit. He rendered undying service to the English working-class. The real price is that which a certain quantity of work performed actu- NATIONAL DIFFERENCES OF WAGES 561 J. COTTON Yam Cloth FLAX & HEMP Yarn Cloth SILK Yarn Cloth WOOL Yarn Cloth 5,927,831 16,753,369 493,449 2,802,789 77,789 776,975 5.733,828 6,634,026 23,454,810 951,426 4,107,396 195,380 1,130,398 1,484,544 8,377,183 9,870,875 42,141,505 1,801,272 4,804,803 918,342 1,587,303 3,843,450 12,156,998 10,351,04 46,903,796 2,505,497 9,155,318 768,067 1,409,221 5,424,017 20,102.259 See the Blue books "Statistical Abstract of the United Kingdom," Nos. 1 1 THIRD VILLAGE s. l But the land requires cultivation, and it will be found that the labourers employed upon it are not the tenants of the owner, but that they come from a neighbouring open village, perhaps three miles off, where a numerous small proprietary had received them when their cottages were destroyed in the close villages around. The individual value of these articles is now below their social value; in other words, they have cost less labour- time than the great bulk of the same article produced under the average social conditions. The seller has himself produced the commodities or represents their producer, but the buyer has to no less extent produced the commodities represented by his money, or represents their producer. per hour, and £4 10s. To-day the product satisfies a social want. apparently so worded that, unless persons are detected working after 8 o'clock at night they appear to come under no pro- tective provisions at all, and if they do so work, the mode of proof is so doubtful that a conviction can scarcely follow." (1. In the Factory Report of 1844- 1845, it is said with irony: "No instances have come to my knowledge of adult women having expressed any regret at their rights being thus far interfered with." 2 The working-time of children under 13 was reduced to 6y, and in certain circum- stances to 7 hours a-day. On this point I will only say further, that Owen's "labour-money," for in- stance, is no more "money" than a ticket for the theatre. 2 "Pauper ubique jacet," cried Queen Elizabeth, after a journey through England. Public credit becomes the credo of capital. This was too difficult. then labour must, of course, be dear. The succes- sors of these rich are occupying the larger houses at the rate of a family to each room [. 113.) Truly comical is M. of tea. This same Scotch sycophant and fine talker, Macaulay, says: "We hear to-day only of retrogression and see only progress." What eyes, and especially what ears! 1 Among the accusers of the workpeople, the most angry is the anony- mous author quoted in the text of "An Essay on Trade and Commerce, con- taining Observations on Taxes, &c," London, 1770. The work is hard and the sum- mer heat increases the exhaustion. The cotton too must not be such rubbish as to cause extra waste in being worked, but must be of suitable quality. 19, forbad the destruction of all "houses of husbandry" to which at least 20 acres of land be- longed. Water Eaton. * The majority of the small mills were weaving sheds, built during the period of prosperity after 1858, for the most part by speculators, of whom one supplied the yarn, another the machinery, a third the buildings, and were worked by men who had been overlookers, or by other persons of small means. MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 459 race" (the wholesale extinction of Indian hand-loom weavers). 98. Carlile Sons & Co., of the linen and cotton thread factory at Paisley, a company which has now existed for about a century, which was in operation in 1752, RATE AND MASS OF SURPLUS-VALUE 3H and four generations of the same family have conducted it". The labour realised in value, is labour of an average social quality; is consequently the expenditure of average labour-power. . It is, however, just this ultimate money-form of the world of commodities that actually conceals, instead of disclosing, the social character of private labour, and the social relations between the individual producers. First metamorphosis, or sale The leap taken by value from the body of the commodity, into the body of the gold, is, as I have elsewhere called it, the salto mortale of the commodity. (See Repts., Insp. They introduced more machinery, and in a moment the labourers were redundant again in a propor- tion satisfactory even to the farmers. Given the mass of surplus-value, then, the larger the one of these parts, the smaller is the other. 1 16 Edward Street, No. 4 ... to the industry of others. . 226 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION \ if you work your mills for 10 hours instead of ll-y, then, other things being equal, the daily consumption of cotton, machinery, &c, will decrease in proportion. 2 Besides the purely technical impediments that are removable by technical means, the irregular habits of the workpeople them- selves obstruct the regulation of the hours of labour. Laing, "National Distress," 1844, p. . The distinction between them is, that one buys and the other sells. This division was the result of concert and combination." 2 In one word: the mass of mankind expropriated itself in honour of the "accu- mulation of capital." Now, one would think, that this instinct of self-denying fanaticism would give itself full fling especially in the Colonies, where alone exist the men and conditions that could turn a social contract from a dream to a reality. The enormous destruction of machinery that occurred in the English manufac- turing districts during the first 15 years of this century, chiefly caused by the employment of the power-loom, and known as the Luddite movement, gave the anti-jacobin governments of a Sid- mouth, aCastlereagh, and the like, a pretext for the most reaction- ary and forcible measures. of Fact.," 31st October, 1855, p. "The Querist." London, 1751, p. . by Sir. — It may be seen from this how favourably Marx judged his predecessors, whenever he found in them real progress, or new and sound ideas. c, p. Then one thousandth part of the value of the machine is daily transferred to the day's product. former, but not the latter? I have in many former reports shown ... c, p. 89. . m. On the contrary, it is because his labour converts the cotton and spindles into yarn, because he spins, that the values of the cotton and spindles go over to the yarn of their own accord. Hence, the diminished expenditure of labour in the house is accompanied by an increased expenditure of money. Just as little does it proceed from the nature of the determining factors of value. Some fled to the mountains and neighbouring islands. This, therefore, is to give you most respectful notice that when we commence work again after the Christmas and New Year's holidays, we shall work 60 hours per week, and no more, or from six to six, with one hour and a half out." (Reports, &c, for 30th April, 1860, p. Its outbreak in 1866 was signalised by the failure of a gigantic London Bank, immediately followed by the collapse of countless swindling companies. The smell of their fish rose to the noses of the great men. Hence their functions are totally independent of their weight, and consequently of all value. . x On the same subject Mr. E. Its real mode of existence in this sphere adequately corresponds to its ideal concept. Every troop that emigrates one year, draws an- other after it the next. Death-rate per 100,000 men in the respective industries between the stated ages. In the market he stood as owner of the commodity "labour-power" face to face with other owners of commodities, dealer against dealer. c, pp. Only buyer and seller, mutually independent, face each other in commodity production. The first word of this adaptation is the creation of a relative surplus-popu- lation, or industrial reserve army. . +£90 var.-f £90 surpl.; but £90 is a given and therefore a constant quantity; hence it appears absurd to treat it as variable. 333, 334. He carried on a life-long contest, not only with the embittered manufacturers, but also with the Cabinet, to whom the number of votes given by the masters in the Lower House, was a matter of far greater importance than the number of hours worked by the "hands" in the mills. In Marylebone, blacksmiths die at the rate of 31 per thousand per annum, or 11 above the mean of the male adults of the country in its entirety. The rate of surplus-value being 100%, the surplus-value lies in the surplus or net product of 40,000 lbs. "In most of the cotton, worsted, and silk mills, an exhausting state of excitement necessary to enable the workers satisfactorily to mind the machinery, the motion of which has been greatly accelerated within the last few years, seems to me not unlikely to be one of the causes of that excess of mortality from lung dis- ease, which Dr. Greenhow has pointed out in his recent report on this subject." 2 There cannot be the slightest doubt that the tendency that urges capital, so soon as a prolongation of the hours of labour is once for all forbidden, to compensate itself, by a systematic heightening of the intensity of labour, and to convert every improvement in machinery into a more perfect means of exhausting the workman, must soon lead to a state of things in which a reduction of the hours of labour will again be inevitable. These antagonistic forms of commodities are the real forms in which the process of their exchange moves and takes place. Quantity Exported, 1805. The latter categories are, with the exception of the stocking-weavers, exclusively town- dwellers. The proportions in which they are exchangeable are at first quite a matter of chance. et pour comble de ruine, il n'ose pas vendre ses productions ou et comme il le veut; il n'ose pas acheter ce dont il a besoin aux marchands qui pourraient le lui livrerau meilleur prix. This bred a decay of people, and (by consequence) a decay of towns, churches, tithes, and the like .... 443.) "But are they (the employers) not compelled to demand them (school certificates)?" "By law they are; but I am not aware that they are demanded by the employers." "Then it is your opinion, that this provision of the Act as to requiring certificates, is not generally carried out in the collieries?" "It is not carried out." (ns. It thus depreciates his labour-power. The currency of money is the constant and monotonous repetition of the same process. The battle of competition is fought by cheapening of commodities. So soon as the handling of this tool becomes the work of a machine, then, with the use-value, the exchange-value too, of the workman's labour-power vanishes; the workman becomes unsaleable, like paper money thrown out of currency by legal enactment. Every crevice is topped to maintain warmth, and in an atmosphere of dia- bolic odour, with a mud floor, with his only clothes drying on his back, he often sups and sleeps with his wife and children. 552 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION of wage, and are therefore paid by time. The official statistics for the year 1872 show, as compared with 1871, a decrease in area under culti- vation of 134,915 acres. They flow in from Japan, from the most remote States of South Ameri- ca, and from the Canary Islands. Mill, "Elements, &c." Translated by Parissot. There are 40,000 of them. Moreover, this character of being necessary conditions of social labour, a character that distinguishes them from the dispersed and relatively more costly means of production of isolated, independent labourers, or small masters, is acquired even when the numerous workmen assembled together do not assist one another, but merely work side by side. which gives for the value of 10,000 lbs. 267, 291. c, p. 11.) With reference to the labour of women, Saunders, the factory inspector, says in his report of 1844: "Amongst the female operatives there are some women who, for many weeks in succession, except for a few days, are employed from 6 a.m. till midnight, with less than 2 hours for meals, so that on 5 days of the week they have only 6 hours left out of the 24, for going to and from their homes and resting in bed." 404 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION The productiveness of machinery is, as we saw, inversely proportional to the value transferred by it to the product. this soup may be provided at — d., the portion of 20 ounces." 2 With the advance of capitalistic production, the adulteration of food rendered Thompson's ideal su- perfluous. The mercantilists lay special stress on the qualitative aspect of the expression of value, and consequent- ly on the equivalent form of commodities, which attains its full perfection in money. The seller of the Bible, who prefers something to warm his inside, no more thought of exchanging his Bible for linen than our weaver knew that wheat had been exchanged for his linen. It is not money that renders commodities commensurable. 75, 76.) 2 "Treating labour as a commodity, and capital, the produce of labour, as another, then, if the values of these two commodities were regulated by equal quantities of labour, a given amount of labour would ... In truth, my first act, the purchase, was from the standpoint of A, a sale, and my second act, the sale, was from the standpoint of B, a purchase. If the spin- ner, instead of spinning, were working in a coal mine, the sub- ject of his labour, the coal, would be supplied by Nature; never- theless, a definite quantity of extracted coal, a hundredweight for example, would represent a definite quantity of absorbed la- bour. Gamier, vol. If, e.g., in consequence of fa- vourable circumstances, accumulation in a particular sphere of production becomes especially active, and profits in it, being greater than the average profits, attract additional capital, of course the demand for labour rises and wages also rise. l Just as every country needs a reserve of money for its home circulation, so, too, it requires one for external circulation in the markets of the world. Thus the prescribed corvee amounts to 56 working-days yearly. The manufacturers began by here and there discharging a part of, in many cases half of, the young persons and women employed by them, and then, for the adult males, restoring the almost obsolete night-work. Hence the air inhaled in 24 hours by each individual is about 720,000 cubic inches, or 416 cubic feet. Without any doubt, the shortening of the hours of labour .... 3 "Gang work is cheaper than other work; that is why they are em- ployed," says a former gang-master (1. To ap- propriate labour during all the 24 hours of the day is, therefore, of the North wants to break the head of the Paul of the South with all his might, because the Peter of the North hires his labour by the day, and the Paul of the South hires his by the life. It will, therefore, be useful, for a clear comprehension of the relation of the parties, to assume provisionally, that the possessor of labour-power, on the occasion of each sale, immediately receives the price stip- ulated to be paid for it. In this place we shall merely indicate a few results by way of anticipation. See "Report from Geneva on the Watch Trade" in "Reports by H. 1 Our friend, Moneybags, who as yet is only an embryo cap- italist, must buy his commodities at their value, must sell them at their value, and yet at the end of the process must withdraw more value from circulation than he threw into it at starting. Later, a treddle spinning- wheel with two spindles was invented, but adepts in spinning, who could spin two threads at once, were almost as scarce as two- leaded men. In the one case, it is the making dependent what was before independent; in the other case, the making independent what was before de- pendent. c, p. From the point of view, however, of the capitalist who employs these 12 men, the working- day is that of the whole dozen. The repre- sentative of the clan, its chief or "great man," was only the titu- lar owner of this property, just as the Queen of England is the titular owner of all the national soil. The greater part of all other commodities, especially in the imperfectly developed stages of civil society, will continue for a long time to be estimated by the former antiquated and illusory value of the measure of value. One occurs at Sheffield at the end of 1866. The process, therefore, that clears the way for the capitalist system, can be none other than the process which takes away from the labourer the possession of his means of production; a process that transforms, on the one hand, the social means of subsistence and of production into capital, on the other, the immediate producers into wage- labourers. 8, 9.) PIECE-WAGES 553 duced. The collective machine, now an organised system of various kinds of single machines, and of groups of single machines, becomes more and more perfect, the more the process as a whole becomes a continuous one, i.e., the less the raw material is interrupted in its passage from its first phase to its last; in other words, the more its passage made. It is enough that it forms the starting-point. 70, 71.) 186 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION SECTION 2.— THE PRODUCTION OF SURPLUS-VALUE The product appropriated by the capitalist is a use-value, as yarn, for example, or boots. Dr. Aikin says in a work published in 1795: "The trade of Manchester may be divided into four periods. From being a dwarf implement of the human organism, it expands and multiplies into the imple- ment of a mechanism created by man. But so soon as the different oper- ations of a labour-process are disconnected the one from the other, and each fractional operation acquires in the hands of the detail labourer a suitable and peculiar form, alterations become neces- sary in the implements that previously served more than one pur- pose. For as much as all things are dearer than they were, so much do you arise in the pryce of your wares and occupations that ye sell agayne. 39,561 St. 3,068,707 ts. Hence, the less the unit is subject to variation, so much the better does the standard of price fulfil its office. In order, therefore, to find an analogy, we must have recourse to the mist-enveloped regions of the religious world. 2 "Capital pre-supposes wage-labour, and wage-labour pre-supposes capital. Its analysis shows that it is, in reality, a very queer thing, abounding in metaphysical subtleties and theological niceties. 2 But for all that, capi- tal never becomes reconciled to such changes — and this is ad- mitted over and over again by its own representatives — except "under the pressure of a General Act of Parliament" 3 for the com- pulsory regulation of the hours of labour. 1 It extends the labourer's time of production during a given period by shortening his actual life- time. or 24 x 100 working-hours. What opinion should we have of a chemist, who, instead of studying the actual laws of the molecular changes inthe composition and decomposition of matter, and on that foundation solving definite problems, EXCHANGE 85 persons exist for one another merely as representatives of, and, therefore, as owners of, commodities. Right and "labour" were from all time the sole means of enrichment, the present year of course always excepted. If, on the other hand, in consequence, say, of improved looms, this labour-time be re- duced by one-half, the value of the linen would fall by one-half. . (3.) Increase or diminution in surplus-value is always conse- quent on, and never the cause of, the corresponding diminution or increase in the value of labour-power. In the year 1850 there were employed in worsted mills 875,830 spindles; in 1856, 1,324,549 (increase 51.2%), and in 1862, 1,289,172 (decrease 2,7%). In the winter we get a little sugar and water to our Indi- an meal. No doubt he is far from denying that temporary inconveni- ence may result from the capitalist use of machinery. 1 We see, further: The value of 3s. Be- fore he can apply this leisure time productively for himself, a whole series of historical events is required; before he spends it in surplus-labour for strangers, compulsion is necessary. . The detail labourer and his implements are the simplest ele- ments of manufacture. That mankind in general, are naturally inclined to ease and indolence, we fatally experience to be true, from the conduct of our manufacturing populace, who do not labour, upon an average, above four days in a week, unless provisions happen to be very dear Put all the necessaries of the poor under one denomination; for instance, call them all wheat, or suppose that. This occurs every time that, the price of la- bour (reckoned per working-hour) remaining constant, the working- day is prolonged beyond its customary length. In order to enable one portion of a capital to expand its value by being converted into labour-power, it is necessary that another portion be converted into means of production. . . of tea =% a ton of iron. Comm., VI. m. The product of a working-day of 12 hours is 20 lbs. Nevertheless, in order to express the sugar- loaf as so much weight, we put it into a weight-relation with the iron. 14 cottages, each with 1 bedroom, were visited. Comm.," 4tb Rep., 1865, p. Hence trade is advantageously contrasted with gambling, which consists in a mere exchange of money for money." (Th. Corbet, "An Inquiry into the Causes and Modes of the Wealth of Individuals; or the Principles of Trade and Spec- ulation Explained." London, 1841, p. 1 The direct barter of products attains the elementary form of the relative expression of value in one respect, but not in an- other. over-production." (Th. Corbet, I. Paris, 1843. On the other hand, if a commodity be found to have assumed the univer- sal equivalent form (form G), this is only because and in so far as it has been excluded from the rest of all other commodities as their equivalent, and that by their own act. It is thus with the people of Asia, and partic- ularly of the East Indies. 543.) 148 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION the same material elements— a commodity, and money, and the same economic dramatis personse, a buyer and a seller — con- front one another. Why, this Will lug your priests and servants from your sides; Pluck stout men's pillows from below their heads; This yellow slave Will knit and break religions; bless the accurs'd; Make the hoar leprosy ador'd; place thieves, And give them title, knee and approbation, With senators on the bench; this is it, That makes the wappen'd widow wed again: ... The reason for this is not solely because their attention is entirely absorbed in the analysis of the magnitude of value. 1 "If a man can bring to London an ounce of Silver out of the Earth in Peru, in the same time that he can produce a bushelof Corn, then the one is the natural price of the other; now, if by reason of new or more easie mines a man can procure two ounces of silver as easily as he formerly did one, the corn will be as cheap at ten shillings the bushel as it was before at five shillings, ceteris paribus." William Petty. In spite of the many advantages offered by this com- bination of manufactures, it never grows into a complete technical 1 In England, the melting-furnace is distinct from the glass-turnace in which the glass is manipulated. MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 449 loom, which previously had been worked by the power of men. What a happy life the Irish factory operative leads, one exam- ple will show: "On my recent visit to the North of Ireland," says the English Factory Inspector, Robert Baker, "I met with the follow- ing evidence of effort in an Irish skilled workman to afford edu- cation to his children; and I give his evidence verbatim, as I took it from his mouth. Hence, money may be dirt, although dirt is not money. The law by which a constantly increasing quantity of means of production, thanks to the advance in the productiveness of social labour, may be set in movement by a progressively di- minishing expenditure of human power, this law, in a capitalist society— where the labourer does not employ the means of pro- THE GENERAL LAW OP CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 645 duction, but the means of production employ the labourer — undergoes a complete inversion and is expressed thus: the higher the productiveness of labour, the greater is the pressure of the labourers on the means of employment, the more precarious, there- fore, becomes their condition of existence, viz., the sale of their own labour-power for the increasing of another's wealth, or for the self-expansion of capital. On the extravagant supposition that, after the agricultural revolution is complete one-fourth of these are again absorbable, there remain for emigration 921,174 persons. The difference between the two processes is here reflected in their material factors, by the same instrument of production taking part as a whole in the labour- process, while at the same time as an element in the formation of value, it enters only by fractions. To the like effect, but with an opposite tendency: "Working-men are driven from their cottages and forced into the towns to seek for employment; but then a larger surplus is obtained, an thus capital is augmented." ("The Perils of the Nation," 2nd ed. She herself also acknowledged that she could not keep the register... 262-263). 246 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION Mr. Charles Parsons, late house surgeon of the same institu- tion, writes in a letter to Commissioner Longe, amongst other things: "I can only speak from personal observation and not from statistical data, but I do not hesitate to assert that my indigna- tion has been aroused again and again at the sight of poor children whose health has been sacrificed to gratify the avarice of either parents or employers." He enumerates the causes of the diseases of the potters, and sums them up in the phrase, "long hours." The report of the Commission trusts that "a manu- facture which has assumed so prominent a place in the whole world, will not long be subject to the remark that its great success is accompanied with the physical deterioration, wide- spread bodily suffering, and early death of the workpeople . the working stock of the cattle and the ... I., p. The surplus-value is his property; it has never belonged to any- one else. And from this original sin dates the poverty of the great majority that, despite all its labour, has up to now nothing to sell but itself, and the wealth of the few that increases constantly although they have long ceased to work. 6d. Why does gold take the form of money face to face with the linen? One manufacturer, too, tells the plain truth. The more empty the district is of men, the greater is its "relative surplus-population," the greater is their pressure on the means of employment, the greater is the absolute excess of the agri- cultural population over the means for housing it, the greater, therefore, in the villages is the local surplus-population and the most pestilential packing together of human beings. Wages do not contribute, x "Ricardo says: 'In different stages of society the accumulation ol cap- ital or of the means of employing' (i.e., exploiting) 'labour is more or less rapid, and must in all cases depend on the productive powers of labour. It appears as primitive, because THE SO-CALLED PRIMITIVE ACCUMULATION 715 it forms the pre-historic stage of capital and of the mode of pro- duction corresponding with it. The attendance at school must be between 8 a. According to the Census of 1861, the number of persons employed was 1,428, of whom 1,268 females from 5 years of age upwards. For operations that demand more exercise of will than actual force, the only power applicable is that controlled every instant by the human mind — in other words, man-power." Mr. Morton then reduces steam-power, horse- power, and man-power, to the unit in general use for steam-engines, namely, the force required to raise 33,000 lbs. 182, sq, 2 A. . But one and the same set of transactions cannot be simultaneously for all owners of commodities both exclu- sively private and exclusively social and general. 1 11 Portland Street, No. 112 . 50-51.) The reports always go beyond their official dates. That which in the labourer ap- peared as movement, now appears in the product as a fixed quality without motion. And what is the great trump-card that they play? possesses a value of 3s. I was the first to point out and to examine critically this two-fold nature of the labour contained in commodities. But an increase in the productiveness of labour in those branches of industry which supply neither the necessaries of life, nor the means of production for such neces- saries, leaves the value of labour-power undisturbed. To simplify matters, we take no account of buildings, coal, &c. 1 The bourgeois capitalists favoured the operation with the view, among others, to promoting free trade in land, to extending the domain of modern agriculture on the large farm-system, and to increasing their supply of the free agricultural proletarians ready to hand. On the other hand, as I have before remarked, the exchange of products springs up at the points where different families, tribes, communities, come in contact; for, in the beginning of civilisation, it is not pri- vate individuals but families, tribes, &c, that meet on an inde- pendent footing. Cochrane, of the Britain Pottery, Glasgow, report: "To keep up our quantity we have gone exten- MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 475 stitution of steam as a motive power in the place of muscles. Malthus," Paris, 1820, pp. 56.) A medical man states: "No special hours are allowed for cooling, but if the temperature gets too high, or the workers' hands get soiled from perspiration, they are allowed to go out for a few minutes.... The "amis du commerce" decided it to be genuine commercial soot, and non-suited the plaintiff farmer, who had in addition to pay the costs of the suit. On the other hand, they are used in common, and therefore on a larger scale than be- fore. II., p. c, p. of cotton absorb only the same amount of labour as formerly did the 6 lbs. If oxen, steam, or water, be used for driving it, only a few boys and girls as feeders are required. This is the case whenever its utility to man is not due to labour. In Holland, therefore, where this system was first inaugurated, the great patriot, De Witt, has in his "Maxims" extolled it as the best system for making the wage-labourer sub- missive, frugal, industrious, and overburdened with labour. But the intellectual desolation artificially produced by converting immature human beings into mere machines for the fabrication of surplus-value, a state of mind clearly distinguisha- ble from that natural ignorance which keeps the mind fallow with- out destroying its capacity for development, its natural fertility, this desolation finally compelled even the English Parliament to make elementary education a compulsory condition to the "pro- 1 1. The certificate of labour is merely evidence of the part taken by the individual in the common labour, and of MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OF COMMODITIES 95 The expression of the value of a commodity in gold— x commodity A=y money-commodity — is its money-form or price. The doctor, Mr. Keys, called too late to the death-bed, du- ly bore witness before the coroner's jury that "Mary Anne Walk- ley had died from long hours of work in an over-crowded work- room, and a too small and badly-ventilated bedroom." In or- der to give the doctor a lesson in good manners, the coroner's jury thereupon brought in a verdict that "the deceased had died of apoplexy, but there was reason to fear that her death had been accelerated by over- work in an over-crowded workroom, &c." "Our white slaves," cried the Morning Star, the organ of the Free- traders, Gobden and Bright, "our white slaves, who are toiled in- to the grave, for the most part silently pine and die." * "It is not in dressmakers' rooms that working to death is the order of the day, but in a thousand other places; in every place I had almost said, where 4 a thriving business' has to be milliners, dressmakers, and ordinary sempstresses, there are three miseries — over-work, deficient air, and either deficient food or deficient digestion.... . It is solely by reason of this identity, that cotton planting, spindle making and spinning, are capable of forming the component parts, differing only quan- titatively from each other, of one whole, namely, the value of the yarn. 135. II., pp. without an in- terval for meal-time of at least 30 minutes. c. m. 3 On this point let us listen to two heart-broken cries. 5, 6. 73.) THE WORKING-DAY 233 thus acquired the right to make the labourer work for him during one day. Lorsqu'il en est besoin, il ne fait que glisser d'une main dans l'autre sans s'arreter un instant." (Le Trosne, 1. 1 The general and necessary tendencies of capital must be distinguished from their forms of manifestation. recognised by both employer and employed as the standard of w 7 ages for the general run of workmen in the trade." (Dunning, 1. Or, why cannot private labour — labour for the account of private individuals — be treated as its opposite, immediate social labour? c, p. 10. 2 Report of the Insp. 1 "Toutes les productions d'un meme genre ne /orment proprement qu'une masse, dont le prix se determine en general et sans egard aux circon- stances particulieres." (Le Trosne, 1. Dunning: "Trades' Unions and Strikes," Lond. Who are the consumers?" (G. THE MODERN THEORY OP COLONISATION 773 som which the labourer pays to the capitalist for leave to retire from the wage-labour market to the land. CHANGES OF MAGNITUDE 523 weight, which the pressure of capital on the one side, and the resistance of the labourer on the other, throws into the scale. Let us remember what these people suffer. . It thus becomes evident that, since the existence of commodities as values is purely social, this social existence can be expressed by the totality of their social relations alone, and consequently that the form of their value must be a socially recognised form. Its value, like that of all other commod- ities, is determined by the working-time necessary to its pro- duction. If we keep labour alone in view, we may designate the separa- tion of social production into its main divisions or genera— viz., agriculture, industries, &c, as division of labour in general, and the splitting up of these families into species and sub-species, as division of labour in particular, and the division of labour within the workshop as division of labour in singular or in detail. Suddenly, however, Say recollects that "with a greater quan- tity" of stockings their "price" (which of course has nothing to do with their exchange-value!) falls "parce que la concurrence les (les producteurs) ob- lige a donner les produits pour ce qu'ils leur coutent." But whence does the profit come, if the capitalist sells the commodities at cost-price? The never-ending augmentation of exchange-value, which the miser strives after, by seeking to save 3 his money from circulation, is attained by the more acute capitalist, by constantly throwing it afresh into circula- tion. But what are we to think of John Stuart Mill, who, half a century after Ricardo, solemnly claims superiority over the mercantilists, by clumsily repeating the wretched evasions of Ricardo's earliest vulgarisers? Trj$ 7iXeove$ta<; dva$eiv ix xuiv |iuxu>v tyj<; *f"?i<; a-JTov tov IUoutcova" (Athen. Moreover, only so much of the time spent in the production of any article is counted, as, under the given social conditions, is necessary. Moreover, the human machinery will, as we have just seen, get the steam up of its own accord, and burst or run amuck in our great towns. . Capitalist production, by collecting the population in great centres, and causing an ever-increasing preponderance of town population, on the one hand concentrates the historical motive power of society; on the other hand, it dis- turbs the circulation of matter between man and the soil, i. With a given degree of exploitation of labour-power, the mass of the surplus-value produced is determined by the number of workers simultaneously exploited; and this corresponds, although in varying proportions, with the magnitude of the capi- tal. The variable capital annually laid out amounts, therefore, to £3,000. And lastly, if, as must be the case, the relative value of each commodity in turn, becomes expressed in this expanded form, we get for each of them a relative value- form, different in every case, and consisting of an interminable series of expressions of value. The invariable object of the former is to get their work done as cheaply as possible; and they do not fail to employ every artifice to this purpose, whilst the latter are equally attentive to every occasion of distressing their masters into a compliance with higher demands." ("An Enquiry into the Causes of the Present High Price of Provisions," pp. As early as 1696 John Bellers says: "For if one had a hundred thousand acres of land and as many pounds in money, and as many cattle, without a labourer, what would the rich man be, but a labourer? 29. In a system of machinery, not only is the framework of the machine consumed in common by its numerous operating implements, but the prime mover, together with a part of the transmitting mechanism, is consumed in common by the numerous operative machines. I therefore call it the constant part of capital, or, more shortly, constant capital. c, pp. The value of labour-power, as dependent on its wear and tear, increases with the dura- tion of its functioning, and in more rapid proportion than the increase of that duration. At this moment, while English workmen with their wives and children are dying of cold and hunger, there are mil- lions of English gold— the produce of English labour— being invested in Russian, Spanish, Italian, and other foreign enterprises." — Reynolds' Newspaper, January 20th, 1867. Hence, too, the economic paradox, that the most powerful instrument for shortening labour-time, becomes the most unfailing means for placing every moment of the labourer's time and that of his fam- ily, at the disposal of the capitalist for the purpose of expanding the value of his capital. We declaim against the Vir- ginian and Carolinian cotton-planters. Lastly, the extraordinary productiveness of modern indus- try, accompanied as it is by both a more extensive and a more intense exploitation of labour-power in all other spheres of pro- duction, allows of the unproductive employment of a larger and larger part of the working-class, and the consequent reproduction, on a constantly extending scale, of the ancient domestic slaves under the name of a servant class, including men-servants, wom- en-servants, lackeys, &c. The sooner it is over — the sooner Ireland becomes a grazing coun- try, with the comparatively thin population which a grazing country re- quires, the better for all classes." The English Corn Laws of 1815 secured Ire- land the monopoly of the free importation of corn into Great Britain. where the consumption of a commodity is a part of the process of production. Near his work? 130, Note.) John St. Mill, on the con- trary, accepts on the one hand Ricardo's theory of profit, and annexes on the other hand Senior's "remuneration of abstinence." He is as much at home in absurd contradictions, as he feels at sea in the Hegelian contradiction, the source of all dialectic. It began by being £100, it is now £110, and so on. Employment of women. It is not possible to express the value of linen in linen. Even as late as the beginning of the 18th century, sawmills driven by Water overcame the opposition of the people, supported as it was by Parliament, only with great difficulty. But the law of value in its international application is yet more modified by this, that on the world-market the more produc- tive national labour reckons also as the more intense, so long as the more productive nation is not compelled by competition to lower the selling price of its commodities to the level of their value. Whether the change in the price corre- spond to an actual change of value in the commodities, or whether it be the result of mere fluctuations in market-prices, the effect on the quantity of the medium of circulation remains the same. . But although the factory as a whole be driven by its steam-engine, yet either some of the individual machines may require the aid of the workman for some of their movements (such aid was nec- essary for the running in of the mule carriage, before the inven- tion of the self-acting mule, and is still necessary in fine-spinning mills); or, to enable a machine to do its work, certain parts of it may require to be handled by the workman like a manual tool; this was the case in machine-makers' workshops, before the con- version of the slide rest into a self-actor. Piece-wages become, from this point of view, the most fruitful source of reductions of wages and capitalistic cheating. Thus, not only does the historically developed social pro- ductiveness of labour, but also its natural productiveness, appear- to be productiveness of the capital with which that labour is incorporated. In the ancient Asiatic and other ancient modes of production, we find that the conversion of products into commodities, and therefore the conversion of men into pro- ducers of commodities, holds a subordinate place, which, however, increases in importance as the primitive communities approach nearer and nearer to their dissolution. 143 and Note.) Apart from Liebig's wrong interpretation of the word "labour," by which word he understands something quite different from what Political MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 507 ist production, therefore, develops technology, and the combin- ing together of various processes into a social whole, only by sapping the original sources of all wealth— the soil and the la- bourer. There is no longer any need for this equation to figure as a link in the chain of equations that express the values of all other commodities, because the equivalent commodity, gold, now has the character of money. One house, belonging to a fami- ly called Richardson, was of quite unapproachable beauty. 31.) 572 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION necessaries in order to maintain his labour-power, just as coal and water are supplied to the steam-engine and oil to the wheel. The most notable political economist of that period — E. A man lives here, in Wright's house, with his wife, her mother, and 5 children; the house has a front kitchen, scullery, bedroom over the front kitchen; front kitchen and bed- room, 12 feet 2 inches by 9 feet 5 inches; the whole ground floor, 21 feet 2 inches by 9 feet 5 inches. "Men were then forced to work" [i.e., to work gratis for others], "because they were slaves of others; men are now forced to work" [i.e., to work gratis for non- workers] "because they are the slaves of their necessities," he does not thence conclude, like the fat holder of benefices, that the wage-labourer must always go fasting. They are, as a rule, stunted in growth, ill-shaped, and frequently ill-formed in the chest; they become prematurely old, and are certainly short-lived; they are phlegmatic and bloodless, and exhibit their debility of constitution by obstinate attacks of dyspepsia, and disorders of the liver and kidneys, and by rheu- matism. Ce fruit est le revenu qui nait du capital" (Sismondi: "Nouv. 144.) "The Scotch grandees dispossessed families as they would grub up coppice-wood, and they treated villages and their people as Indians harassed with wild beasts do, in their vengeance, a jungle with tigers.... The Act comprises: 1) Textile Mills. the labour has increased within the last few years fully 10 per cent., owing to the increased speed of the machinerv in spinning. If on the one hand the coat ranks as nothing but the embodiment of abstract human labour, so, on the other hand, the tailoring which is actually embodied in it, counts as nothing but the form under which that abstract labour is realised. 4 Still, Condillac's argument is 1 "L'Schange devient desavantageux pour l'une des parties, lorsque quel- que chose etrangere vient diminuer ou exagerer le prix; alors l'egalite est blessee, mais la lesion procede de cette cause et non de l'echange." (Le Trosne, 1. * It is evident that whenever it costs as much labour to produce a machine as is saved by the employment of that machine, there is nothing but a transposition of labour; consequently the total labour required to produce a commodity is not lessened or the productiveness of labour is not increased. Wherever it appears, the abolition of serfdom has been long effected, and the highest 716 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION development of the middle ages, the existence of sovereign towns, has been long on the wane. With all its defects this Act, together with the Swiss Federal Factory Law of March 23, 1877, is still by far the best piece of leg- islation in this field. The new capital of £2,000 brings in a surplus-value of £400, and this, too, is capitalised, converted into a second addi- tional capital, which, in its turn, produces a further surplus-value of £80. 1854.— 1 in 17. 1 We must now examine more closely this peculiar commodity, labour-power. But in no other way will it be influenced." (Ramsay. . It manifests itself, amongst other ways, in the fright- ful fact that a great part of the children employed in modern fac- tories and manufactures, are from their earliest years riveted to the most simple manipulations, and exploited for years, without being taught a single sort of work that would afterwards make them of use, even in the same manufactory or factory. According to the third law, a change in the magnitude of sur- plus-value, pre-supposes a movement in the value of labour-power, which movement is brought about by a variation in the produc- tiveness of labour. On the other hand, we treat the capitalist producer as owner of the entire surplus-value, or, better perhaps, as the representative of all the sharers with him in the booty. 317.) This last apologetic phrase Ure himself again cancels. lbs. 194, note.) 2 James Mill, 1. During their currency, coins wear away, some more, others less. Just as in Man- ufacture, the direct co-operation of the detail labourers estab- lishes a numerical proportion between the special groups, so in an organised system of machinery, where one detail machine is con- stantly kept employed by another, a fixed relation is established between their numbers, their size, and their speed. The class of wage-labourers, essential to these, is wanting. "When the inhabitants have convinced themselves, by boring a hole in the tree, that the pith is ripe, the trunk is cut down and divided into several pieces, the pith is extracted, mixed with water and filtered: it is then quite fit for use as sago. Reports, &c, for 31st October, 1848, p. On the whole the working population, subject to the Fac- tory Act, has greatly improved physically. Unluckily for him, weavers are not few and far be- tween. 1,307,293 lbs. London., 1843, p. With richer mines, the same quantity of labour would embody itself in more diamonds, and their value would fall. 1 "The natural worth of anything consists in its fitness to supply the necessities, or serve the conveniencies of human life." (John Locke, "Some Con- siderations on the Consequences of the Lowering of Interest, 1691," in Works Edit. From this alone it is apparent that the labour expended on the production of gold is rather increasing while that expended on silver production has decidedly decreased, which quite natu- rally explains the drop in the value of the latter. In order then to be able to buy without selling, he must have sold previously without buying. So also was it with Holland and England. What, on the other 208 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION It is otherwise with the subjective factor of the labour-proc- ess, with labour-power in action. . The relative value of a commodity may vary, although its value remains constant. In one day, e.g., must be weeded an extent of land, which, for this work, especially in maize plantations, needs twice as much time. the injury to workpeople who are not employed on piece-work, but receive weekly wages." (Leonard Horner in "Reports of Insp. l James I: Any one wandering about and begging is declared a rogue and a vagabond. They are used for manure, for making bed- flocks, for shoddy, and they serve as the raw material of paper. The fact that the production of use-values, or goods, is carried on under the control of a capitalist and on his behalf, does not alter the general character of that production. These are the conditions of the problem. Certainly, this growth appears less important when we consider that in 1838 the hand-loom weavers with their families still numbered 800,000, 1 not to mention those thrown out of work in Asia, and on the Continent of Europe. They may both simultaneously in- crease from 3 shillings to 4. We can therefore conceive the situation of those hands who were employed for only 3, A 3y or 4 days a week, or for only 6 hours a day f Even in 1863, after a comparative improvement had set in, the weekly wages of 1 1. Kincaid in "Reports, &c, 31st Oct., 1856," p. Senior discovered at Manchester, that the profit (including interest) of capital is the product of the last hour of the twelve, he had announced to the world another discovery. On the other hand, constant labour of one uniform kind disturbs the intensity and flow of a man's animal spirits, which find recreation and delight in mere change of activity. Whether one kind occupies a greater space in his general activity than another, depends on the difficulties, greater or less as the case may be, to be overcome in attaining the useful effect 1 Even Ricardo has his stories a la Robinson. . This equalisation of unequal quantities not merely does away with the determination of value. The remnant of the aborigines flung on the sea-shore, tried to live by catching fish. The only remedy for this evil, short of the limitation of the labour of adults, which would, in our opinion, create an evil greater than that which is sought to be remedied, appears to be the plan of working double sets -of children." . . c, Fourth Report (1865), 58, p. Hence all the inconveniences that our E.G. Wakefield pictures so doughtily, so eloquently, so pathetically. As a consequence of this there is a regular trade in the purchase of "fag-ends of leases." "Gentlemen in this business may be fairly expected to do as they do — get all they can from the tenants while they have them, and leave as little as they can for their successors." 4 The rents are weekly, and these gentlemen run no risk. He begins, post festum, with the results of the process of development ready to hand before him. * "In the early days of textile manufactures, the locality of the factory depended upon the existence of a stream having a sufficient fall to turn a water-wheel; and, although the establishment of the water-mills was the com- mencement of the breaking up of the domestic system of manufacture, yet the mills necessarily situated upon streams, and frequently at consider- able distances the one from the other, formed part of a rural, rather than an urban system; and it was not until the introduction of the steam-power as a substitute for the stream that factories were congregated in towns, and localities where the coal and water required for the production of steam were found in sufficient quantities. 47, 49.) 308 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION transformable into capital. 1 Just as every qualitative difference between commodities is ex- tinguished in money, so money, on its side, like the radical leveller that it is, does away with all distinctions. 13, and another of 1597. Long before insufficiency of diet is a matter of hygienic concern, long before the physiologist would think of counting the grains of nitrogen and carbon which intervene be- tween life and starvation, the household will have been utterly destitute of material comfort; clothing and fuel will have been even scantier than food— against inclemencies of weather there 1 1. The capital given in ex- change for labour-power is converted into necessaries, by the con- sumption of which the muscles, nerves, bones, and brains of existing labourers are reproduced, and new labourers are begotten. s. In the same time as the Chinaman spins one pound of cotton, the Eng- lishman spins several hundreds of pounds. Over-taxation is not an incident, but rather a principle. The channel of circulation necessarily draws to itself a sum sufficient to fill it, and never admits any more." ("Wealth of Nations." Bk. IV., ch. Third Report. From 1602 to 1734, he remarks, they buried 150 millions of pounds sterling of silver, which originally came from America to Europe. But, then, he tries to buy all commodities as cheaply as possible, and always accounts for his profit by simple cheating, by buying under, and selling over the value. 3 J. The products of this common labour served partly as a re- serve fund against bad harvests and other accidents, partly as a public store for providing the costs of war, religion, and other common expenses. Along with the absolute magnitude of the latter, its relative magnitude also falls, i.e., its magnitude rela- tively to the value of labour-power whose magnitude remains unaltered. The rate of surplus-value is therefore an exact expression for the degree of exploitation of labour-power by capital, or of the labourer by the capitalist. 2 An exception to this law holds good whenever the decomposition of the labour-process begets new and comprehensive functions, that either had no place at all, or only a very modest one, in handicrafts. . A London manufacturer, who in other respects looks upon the compulsory regulation of the hours of labour as a protection for the workpeople against the manufacturers, and for the manufacturers themselves against the wholesale trade, states: "The pressure in our business is caused by the shippers, who want, e.g., to send the goods by sailing vessel so as to reach their destination at a given season, and at the same time want to pocket the difference in freight between a sailing vessel and a steamship, or who select the earlier of two steamships in order to be in the foreign market before their competitors." 3 "This could be obviated," says a manufacturer, "at the expense of an enlargement of the works under the pressure of a General Act of Parliament." 1. 4,392, 176 yds. Here, then, under our own eyes and on a large scale, a proc- ess is revealed, than which nothing more excellent could be wished for by orthodox economy for the support of its dogma: that 1 If the product also diminishes relatively per acre, it must not be for- gotten that for a century and a half England has indirectly exported the soil of Ireland, without as much as allowing its cultivators the means for making up the constituents of the soil that had been exhausted. This had naturally to be determined otherwise than by its own compensating variations. See also "Agricultural Labourers (Ireland). On the other hand, the actual return of the soil rose rapidly. Soon after this the June insurrection in Paris and its bloody suppression united, in England as on the Continent, all fractions of the ruling classes, landlords and capitalists, stock-exchange wolves and shop-keepers, Protectionists and Free-traders, government and opposition, priests and freethink- ers, young whores and old nuns, under the common cry for the salvation of Property, Religion, the Family and Society. 1 were in such short circles, viz., weekly, as happens among poor artisans and labourers, who receive and pay every Saturday, then -tk parts of 1 mil- lion of money would answer these ends; but if the circles be quarterly, ac- cording to our custom of paying rent, and gathering taxes, then 10 millions were requisite. 19, 20. "Traite theonque et pratique des entreprises industrielles." 2nd ed. [sic/] or before 2 p. ol this book. The effect on the health of the workpeople is self-evident. of Fact, for 31st October, 1858/' pp. Bright proposed to lower the rate of pay from l%d. It there- by reproduces and perpetuates the condition for exploiting the la- bourer. He kills two birds with one stone. Aye! it is hot in here. The use- value of 15 lbs. Lond., 1805, V. . This is the constant part of his capital. It is a strange proof of the general neglect of the morals and health 1 1. Lamentable in- deed, must be the case, when, notwithstanding all that is evn dent with regard to the quality of the present accommodation, it is the common conclusion of competent observers that even the general badness of dwellings is an evil infinitely less urgent than their mere numerical insufficiency. He lets the money go, but only with the sly inten- tion of getting it back again. The following is an example which is of very frequent occurrence: — One fireman commenced work on the Monday morning at a very early hour. In 1838, the number of hanks spun per week was 18,000, in 1843 it amounted to 21,000. The difficulty lies, not in comprehending that money is a commodity, but in discovering how, why, and by what means a commodity becomes money. Their owner must, therefore, lend them his tongue, or hang a ticket on them, before their prices can be communi- cated to the outside world. Furnaces and workshops that stand idle by night, and absorb no living labour, are "a mere loss" to the capi- talist. Its condi- tions of life sink below the average normal level of the working- class; this makes it at once the broad basis of special branches of capitalist exploitation. The appearance of products as commodities pre-supposes such a development of the social division of labour, that the separation of use-value from exchange-value, a separation which first begins with barter, must already have been completed. In the text, however, there is no question of the peculium of the emigrants, who are in great part not labourers. 278.) The same system ob- tains in the glass and paper works as in the metallurgical, already cited. 2,210 2,887 2,549 1 "Rep. Therefore since his wages 3 are produced in 5^- hours, and the yarn produced in one hour also 3 contains 5y hours' work, there is no witchcraft in the result, that 3 the value created by his 5-r- hours' spinning, is equal to the value of the product spun in one hour. Its Report, in 1842, unfolded, in the words of Nassau W. 1 On the other hand, the cheapness of the articles produced by machinery, and the improved means of transport and communication furnish the weapons for conquering foreign markets. Their work is like slav- ery." 1 When women and their children work at home, which now-a-days means in a hired room, often in a garret, the state of things is, if possible, still worse. [So also in Sections 18 and 19 of the Statute of Apprentices of Elizabeth, ten days' imprisonment is decreed for him that pays the higher wages, but twenty-one days for him that receives them.] A statute of 1360 increased the penalties and authorised the masters to extort labour at the legal rate of wages by corporal punishment. On the treatment of the slaves there is a good compila- tion in Charles Comte, "Traite de la Legislation." 3me ed. This form, it is plain, occurs practically only in the first beginning, when the products of labour are converted into commodities by accidental and occasional exchanges. The two divide the total product in proportions deter- mined by contract. They allege that numbers of the parents withdraw their children from the industry brought under the Act, in order to sell them where "freedom of labour" still rules, i.e., where chil- dren under 13 years are compelled to work like grown-up people, and therefore can be got rid of at a higher price. Nevertheless, in a given country, at a given period, the average quantity of the means of subsistence necessary for the labourer is practically known. On the other hand, it is no less certain that the rise of the English woollen factories, together with the grad- ual conversion of arable land into sheep pasture, brought about the superfluity of agricultural labourers that led to their being driven in masses into the towns. The return of money into the hands of the weaver is brought about only by the renewal or repetition of the process of circulation with a fresh commodity, which renewed process ends with the same result as its predecessor did. Only consider! where would agriculture and trade be without the knife? He knows that when a long period of time is taken, commodities are sold neither over nor under, but at their average price. But even in the colonies properly so called, the Christian char- acter of primitive accumulation did not belie itself. 9-10. Une foule de planteurs ont 6te mines de la sorte, d'autres ont ferme leurs ateliers pour echapper a une ruine imminente... On leaving the warehouses at 9 or 10 o'clock at night, the children are often given a bundle of lace to take home with them and finish. It lies deeper. It is not till the 5th Book, on the Revenue of the State, that he reproduces Ferguson. of Fact, for Quarter ending 30th September, 1844, and from 1st October, 1844, to 30th April, 1845, p. Nevertheless the reader will clearly see, that where we have labour, not carried on by fits and starts, but repeated day after day with unvarying uniformity, a point must inevitably be reached, where extension of the working-day and intensity of the labour mutually exclude one another, in such a way that lengthening of the working-day becomes compatible only with a lower degree of intensity, and a higher degree of intensity, only with a shortening of the working- day. Coal- mining: 1851, 183,389: 1861, 246,613. * The Irish famine of 1846 killed more than 1,000,000 people, but it killed poor devils only. 212 sqq.) Note to the second edition. Atheism cannot be of long contin- uance." (P. 2 According to this, a plough drawn by oxen, which is a contrivance common to the most dif- ferent epochs, would be a machine, while Claussen's circular loom, which, worked by a single labourer, weaves 96,000 picks per minute, would be a mere tool. 40.) 2 "Exchanges rise and fall every week, and at some particular times in the year run high against a nation, and at other times run as high on the contrary." (N. The labour of women and children was, therefore, the first thing sought for by capital- ists who used machinery. It recites, among other things, that many farms and large flocks of cattle, especially of sheep, are concentrated in the hands of a few men, whereby the rent of land has much risen and tillage has fall- en off, churches and houses have been pulled down, and marvellous numbers of people have been deprived of the means wherewith 720 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION to maintain themselves and their families. Lord Dufferin is one of those land magnates. The commodity, from being the individual product of an independent artificer, becomes the so- cial product of a union of artificers, each of whom performs one, 1 To give a more modern instance: The silk spinning and weaving of Lyons and Nimes "est toute patriarcale; elle emploie beaucoup de femmes et d'enfants, mais sans les epuiser ni les corrompre; elle les laisse dans leur belles vallees de la Drome, du Var, de I'lsere, de Vaucluse, pour y elever des vers et devider leurscocons; jamais elle n'entre dans une veritable fabri- que Pour el re aussi bien observe ... c, p. 59.) The writer here alludes to the Preston factory opera- tives, who were employed on Preston Moor. To accumulate, is to conquer the world of social wealth, to increase the mass of human beings exploited by him, and thus to extend both the direct and the indirect sway of the capitalist. The increase of the latter appears, therefore, in the diminution of the mass of labour in proportion to the mass of means of production moved by it, or in the diminution of the subjective factor of the labour-process as compared with the objective factor. 4 Ure, 1. TV. 67.) 524 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION only one variable factor, viz., the productiveness of labour; (2), and this error vitiates his analysis much more than (1), he has not, any more than have the other economists, investi- gated surplus-value as such, i.e., independently of its particular forms, such as profit, rent, &c. c, pp. 6d. Od.-r£3 lis. 6 by 6 ft. On the other hand, both opposing sides are commodities, unities of use-value and value. 8 The Act allows children to be employed for 10 hours if they do not work day after day, but only on alternate days. They paid 10 hours' wages for 12 or 15 hours' lordship over labour-power. But the historical de- velopment of the antagonisms, immanent in a given form of pro- duction, is the only way in which that form of production can be dissolved and a new form established. and half an hour after 7 p. 59.) The author of this epoch making anonymous work is J. Karl Marx und Friedrich Engels, "Manifest der Kommunistischen Partei," London, 1848, pp. He now gets obstinate. Newman, I. The quantity of gold necessary to realise this sum, depends, in the first instance, on the rapidity of currency of the means of payment. Its author is William Stafford. Hume took his theory of interest from it. The provincials cheated the Romans, and thus got back from their conquerors, in the course of trade, a portion of the tribute. In practice, however, the conditions were much more favourable to the labourers than in the statute-book. 200.) * "It (the division of labour) produces also an economy ot time by separating the work into its different branches, all of which may be carried on into execution at the same moment .... Hence they were noted "with exultation" as especially worthy of remark and as wonders by the far-seeing "amis du bommeree" and recommended as models for their own time and for posterity. xl., xli. 12, 13.) As to the further development of this theory by Ricardo and his disciples, James Mill, Lord Overstone, and others, see MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OF COMMODITIES 125 the establishment of a standard of prices, is the business of the State. La Chaux-de-Fond alone, which we may look upon as a huge watch manufactory, produces yearly twice as many as Geneva. 2 How the famine and its consequences have been deliberately made the most of, both by the individual landlords and by the Engish legislature, to forcibly carry out the agricultural revolution and to thin the population of Ireland down to the proportion satisfactory to the landlords, I shall show more fully in Vol. Pretext: "Labour in silk mills was lighter than in mills for other fabrics, and less likely in other respects also to be prejudicial to health." 5 Official medical inquiries proved afterwards that, on the contrary, "the average death-rate is exceedingly high in the silk districts, and amongst the female part of the population is higher even than it is in the cotton districts of Lancashire." 6 Despite the protests 1 Reports, &c, for Sept.. the intrinsick value, regarded in these metals, is nothing but the quantity." ("Some Considerations," &c, 1691, Works Ed. 1777, vol. "The plough, the yoke, were 'the in- vention of gods, and the occupation of heroes;' are the loom, the spindle, the distaff, of less noble parentage. . The fact that they could live for a whole week on the wage of four days, did not appear to the labourers a sufficient reason that they should work the other two days for the capitalist. In many branches of industry where time-wage is the general rule without legal limits to the TIME-WAGES 547 working-time, the habit has, therefore, spontaneously grown up of regarding the working-day as normal only up to a certain point, e.g., up to the expiration of the tenth hour ("normal working-day," "the day's work," "the regular hours of work"). As on the stage, the same per- sons had to appear in turns in the different scenes of the differ- ent acts. 2 1. The cottages of the agricultural labourers are the places where the work is usually carried on. We know, however, from what has gone before, that the labour-process may continue beyond the time necessary to re- produce and incorporate in the product a mere equivalent for the value of the labour-power. Hence, in the value of the product, there is a re- appearance of the value of the means of production, but there is, strictly speaking, no reproduction of that value. 2 As on our hypothesis he must work on the average 6 hours daily, in order to produce a day's wage corresponding merely to the value of his la- bour-power, as according to the same hypothesis he works only half of every hour for himself, and half for the capitalist, it is 1 This is perceived by the fanatical representative of the industrial bourgeoisie of the 18th century, the author of the "Essay on Trade and Com- merce" often quoted by us, although he puts the matter in a confused way: "It is the quantity of labour and not the price of it (he means by this the nominal daily or weekly wages) that is determined by the price of provi- sions and other necessaries: reduce the price of necessaries very low, and of course you reduce the quantity of labour in proportion. So, too, the money appears in the first phase as a solid crystal of 1 "II y a done quatre termes et trois contractants, dont i'un inter- view deux t'ois." (Le Trosne, 1. 2 In manufacture proper, he says, the division of labour appears to be greater, because "those employed in every different branch of the work can often be collected into the same workhouse, and placed at once under the view of the spectator. 100 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION of money carried on for centuries by kings and princes to such an extent that, of the original weights of the coins, nothing in fact remained but the names. 101. Each of these units is the same as any other, so far as it has the character of the average labour-power of society, and takes effect as such; that is, so far as it requires for producing a commodity, no more time than is needed on an average, no more than is socially necessary. Again, if the technical conditions of the spinning process re- main unchanged, and no change of value takes place in the means of production, the spinner continues to consume in equal work- ing-times equal quantities of raw material, and equal quanti- ties of machinery of unvarying value. 2 "L'ouvrier demandait de la subsistence pour vivre, le chef deman- dait du travail pour gagner." (Sismondi, 1. Trading nations, properly so called, exist in the ancient world only in its interstices, like the gods of Epicurus in the Intermundia, or like Jews in the pores of Polish society. c, p. He himself is a practical man; and though he does not always consider what he says outside his business, yet in his business he knows what he is about. Hence, the labourer preserves the values of the consumed means of production, or transfers them as portions of its value to the product, not by virtue of his additional labour, abstractedly considered, but by virtue of the particular useful character of that labour, by virtue of its special productive form. Newnham (barrister-at-law): "A Review of the Evidence be- fore the Committee of the two Houses of Parliament on the Corn Laws." Lond., 1815, p. 285. During this trans- formation period, legislation also strove to retain the 4 acres of land by the cottage of the agricultural wage-labourer, and forbad him to take lodgers into his cottage. The two earlier forms either express the value of each com- modity in terms of a single commodity of a different kind, or in a series of many such commodities. Although their industry more than any other depends on naviga- tion, yet experience has given them the lie. In our for- mer assumption, according to which 6 working-hours are daily nec- essary in order to reproduce the labour-power itself or to replace the value of the capital advanced in its purchase, a variable capi- tal of 1,500s., that employs 500 labourers at a rate of surplus-value of 100% with a 12 hours' working-day, produces daily a surplus- val- ue of 1,500s. 2 No sooner does labour undergo the least development, than it requires specially prepared instruments. Just as a certain number of simultaneously employed labour- ers are the material pre-requisites for division of labour in manu- facture, so are the number and density of the population, which here correspond to the agglomeration in one workshop, a necessary condition for the division of labour in society. "The gang-system is decidedly the cheapest for the farmer, and decidedly the worst for the chil- dren," says a farmer. So far as this depreciation makes itself acutely felt in competi- tion, the burden falls on the labourer, in the increased exploita- tion of whom the capitalist looks for his indemnification. Paris, 1846. to 2 p. At a certain point their labour-power failed. If one that Wiey would only accept wages by the hour under two conditions (l)i that, with the price of the working-hour, a normal working-day of 9 and 10 hours respectively should be fixed, and that the price of the hour for the 10 hoursj working-day should be higher than that for the hour of the 9 hours' working-day; (2), that every hour beyond the normal working-day should be reckoned as over-time and proportionally more highly paid. Hence, the guild organisation, however much it may have contributed by separating, isolating, and perfecting the handicrafts, to create the material conditions for the existence of manufacture, excluded division of labour in the workshop. The antagonism of these two interests had been favourable to Factory legislation, while on the other hand the absence of that antagonism is sufficient to explain the delays and chicanery of the legislation on mines. If he can sell his goods at a higher price, while his workmen's wages remain unaltered, he is clearly benefited.... All the conditions for carrying on the labour-process are suddenly converted into so many acts of abstinence on the part of the capitalist. In the 15th century the German peasant was nearly everywhere a man, who, whilst subject to certain rents paid in produce and labour was otherwise at least practically free. S'ils donnent cependant leur richesse acquise et accumulee en retourcontre ces produits nouveaux qui sont l'objet de leur fantaisie, ils semblent exposes a epuiser bientot leur fonds de reserve; ils ne travaillent point, avons-nous dit, et ils ne peuvent meme travailler; on croirait done que chaque jour d' it voir diminuer leurs vieilles richesses, et que lorsqu'il ne leur en restera plus, rien ne sera offert en echange aux ouvriers qui travaillent exclusivement pour eux.... This kind of parish-slaves was kept up in England until far into the 19th century under the name of "roundsmen." Elizabeth, 1572: Unlicensed beggars above 14 years of age are to be severely flogged and branded on the left ear unless some one will take them into service for two years; in case of a repetition of the offence, if they are over 18, they are to be exec- uted, unless some one will take them into service for two years; 1 The author of the "Essay on Trade, etc.," 1770, says, "In the reign of Edward VI. "The second period, when they had begun to acquire little fortunes, but worked as hard as before," — for direct exploitation of labour costs labour, as every slave-driver knows — "and lived in as plain a manner as before. Finally, as is shown by modern "domestic industry," some intermediate forms are here and there reproduced in the background of Modern Industry, though their physiognomy is totally changed. This connexion is originated by, and exists in, the circulation alone. . 4 1. Insp. 704 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION misery springs from absolute surplus-population, and that equi- librium is re-established by depopulation. B. Hence, furnaces and workshops constitute lawful claims upon the night-labour of the workpeople. " 4 Up to that time it was supposed, that the children were decimated by malaria, and other diseases peculiar to low-lying and marshy districts. 19. l The lightening of the labour, even, becomes a sort of torture, since the machine does not free the labourer from work, but deprives the work of all interest. Potter in a letter to the Times of March 24th, 1863. The isolation of such functions, their allot- ment to a particular labourer, does not become advantageous till after an increase in the number of labourers employed; but this increase must affect every group proportionally. Of all the classes, that stand face to face with the bourgeoisie to-day, the proletariat alone is a really revo- lutionary class. 1 Just as little can it originate in the second act of circulation, the re-sale of the commodity, which does no more than transform the article from its bodily form back again into its money-form. ne change rien non plus a la somme des valeurs sociales, bien qu'il ajoute a la fortune de Tun ce qu'il ote de la fortune de 1'autre." (J. 3 In manufacture, in order to make the collective labourer, and through him capital, rich in social productive power, each labourer must be made poor in individual productive powers. So far therefore as labour is a creator of use-value, is useful labour, it is a necessary condition, independent of all forms of society, for the existence of the human race; it is an eternal nature- COMMODITIES 43 imposed necessity, without which there can be no material ex- changes between man and Nature, and therefore no life. 2 In contradistinction therefore to the case of other commodities, there enters into the determination of the value of labour-power a historical and moral element. According to the statement of Dr. Meyer in the Bavarian Gazette, May 9th, 1862, the result of an average of 9 years is, that in Prussia out of 1,000 conscripts 716 were unfit for military service, 317 because of deficiency in height, and 399 because of bodily defects.... . c, p. The particular kind of commodity to which it sticks is at first a matter of accident. It is only in Book III. The value of a day's labour-power amounts to 3 shillings, because on our assumption half a day's labour is embodied in that quantity of labour-power, i.e., because the means of subsistence that are daily required for the production of labour-power, cost half a day's labour. The exchange of commodities is therefore accompanied by the following changes in their form. It incessantly forces him to sell his labour-power in order to live, and enables the capitalist to purchase labour-power in or- der that he may enrich himself. Laing, 1. They also regulate the dates for payments that have no direct connexion with the circulation of commodities such as taxes, rents, and so on. The nations bragged cynically of every infamy that served them as a means to capital- istic accumulation. 39, 40, 67, 77, &c. Just as when we estimate the value of any commodity by a definite quantity of the use-value of some other commodity, so in estimating the value of the former in gold, we assume noth- ing more than that the production of a given quantity of gold costs, at the given period, a given amount of labour. According to the "Reglement organique," as this code of the corvee is called, every Wallachian peasant owes to the so-called 1 That which follows refers to the situation in the Roumanian prov- inces before the change effected since the Crimean war. 3 They were acting in the interests of the ill-advised operatives them- selves, "in order to be able to pay them higher wages." "This was the only possible plan by which to maintain, under the Ten Hours' Act, the industrial supremacy of Great Britain." "Perhaps it may be a little difficult to detect irregularities under the relay system; but what of that? In this aspect the coat is a depository of value, but though worn to a thread, it does not let this fact show through. 172-173.) DIVISION OP LABOUR AND MANUFACTURE 347 ing them into a fluid mass of glass. m., and the child might not appear at school again for several days, when it would attend from 3 p. Duffy: "I have seen when the children could none of them keep their eyes open for the work; indeed, none of us could." J. These two first parts of the whole mechanism are there, solely for putting the working machines in motion, by means of which motion the subject of labour is seized upon and modified as desired. 2 "The value or worth of a man, is as of all other things his price — that is to say, so much as would be given for the use of his power." (Th. Hobbes: "Leviathan" in Works, Ed Molesworth. Being a pupil of A. In the expression of value of the linen, the utility of the tailoring consists, not in making clothes, but in making an object, which we at once recognise to be Value, and therefore to be a congelation of labour, but of labour indistin- guishable from that realised in the value of the linen. II., p. In this first form of value, therefore, it is difficult to grasp the polar contrast. 2 "Accumulation of stocks ... We suppose him to have spent on his product only that amount of labour-time that is on an average socially necessa- ry. It is only after considerable development of the science of mechanics, and accumulated practical experience, that the form of a machine becomes settled entirely in accordance with mechanical principles, and emancipated from the traditional form of the tool that gave rise to it. Smith, pp. But such a proposition has not the semblance of probability. 234, 235.) Already it is evident here how in all spheres of social life the lion's share falls to the middleman. of yarn, measuring 400 miles in length." (Reports of Insp. It was not less active in the old-fashioned bakeries than in the modern cotton factories. Many of the cottages are simply lodging-houses, through which all the rabble of the neighbourhood passes. The labourer adds fresh value to the subject of his labour by expending upon it a given amount of additional labour, no matter what the specific character and utility of that labour may be. taken as typical we have cal- culated all possible resources. This expropriation is accomplished by the action of the immanent laws of capitalistic production itself, by the centralisation of capital. This method gave rise in 1866 to a general strike in the English pottery districts. 1865.-109,734,261 lbs. "These gangs will sometimes travel many miles from their own village; they are to be met morning and evening on the roads, dressed in short petticoats, with suit- able coats and boots, and sometimes trousers, looking wonder- fully strong and healthy, but tainted with a customary immoral- ity and heedless of the fatal results which their love of this busy and independent life is bringing on their unfortunate off- spring who are pining at home." 1 Every phenomenon of the fac- tory districts is here reproduced, including, but to a greater extent, ill-disguised infanticide, and dosing children with opi- ates. . He may, on the other hand, "be done" by the clothes merchant. In this way commodities express by their prices how much they are worth, and money serves as money of account whenever it is a question of fixing the value of an article in its money-form, 3 The name of a thing is something distinct from the qualities of that thing. But we have nothing to sell whereby we might advance ye price there of, to countervaile those things that we must buy agayne." In another place the knight asks the doctor: "I pray you, what be those sorts that ye meane. i.,p. The latter weight, on the other hand, does not contain an atom either of the value of the auxiliary materials and implements, or of the value newly created in the process. . c, p. But assuming that he is acting simply as a motor, that a machine has taken the place of his tool, it is evident that he can be replaced by natural forces. But such a degree of development is common to many forms of society, which in other respects present the most varying histori- cal features. An underseller, who sells his bread below the cost-price according to the price of flour, must make it up by getting more out of the la- bour of the men.... Let us look at the matter a little closer. leprincipe de la division du travail s'y revet d'un caractere special II y a bien des devideuses, des moulineurs. R. 6 1. By that Act, "every child, before being employed in a print work must have attended school for at least 30 days, and not less than 150 hours, during the six months immedi- ately preceding such first day of employment, and during the continuance of its employment in the print works, it must attend for a like period of 30 days, and 150 hours during every successive period of six months.... . With what fanaticism, accord- ing to the evidence of manufacturers given in courts of law, their hands set themselves against every interruption in factory labour, the following curi- ous circumstance shows. societe formee il n'y a pas de surabondant en aucun genre." At the same time, in a bantering way, he remarks: "If both the per- sons who exchange receive more to an equal amount, and part with less to an equal amount, they both get the same." It is because Condillac has not the remotest idea of the nature of exchange-value that he has been chosen by Herr Professor Wilhelm Roscher as a proper person to answer for the sound- ness of his own childish notions. The labour-time necessary in each partial process, for attaining the desired effect, is learnt by experience, and the mech- anism of Manufacture, as a whole, is based on the assumption that a given result will be obtained in a given time. Ed. Leipz^ 1854, p. P.; while 1,372 employed upwards of 20 H. But after he has sold he becomes a buyer. It is impressed upon the workpeople, as a great consolation, first, that their sufferings are only temporary ("a temporary inconvenience"), secondly, that machinery acquires the mastery over the whole of a given field of production, only by degrees, so that the extent and intensity of its destructive effect is diminished. 18. Labour-power is only saleable so far as it preserves the means of production in their capacity of capital, reproduces its own value as capital, and yields in unpaid labour a source of additional capital. Since the bodily form of each single commodity is one particular equivalent form amongst numberless others, we have, on the whole, nothing but fragmentary equivalent forms, each excluding the others. In the larger workshops of the London tailors, therefore, a certain piece of work, a waistcoat, e.g., is called an hour, or half an hour, the hour at 6d. Circulation bursts through all restrictions as to time, place, and individuals, im- posed by direct barter, and this it effects by splitting up, into the antithesis of a sale and a purchase, the direct identity that in barter does exist between the alienation of one's own and the acqui- sition of some other man's product. x., n. (London 1581.) The dialogue form of this work led people for a long time to ascribe it to Shakespeare, and even in 1751, it was published under his name. A soil incapable of produce by labour is quite as bad as a soil that produces plentifully without any labour." ("An Enquiry into the Causes of the Present High Price of Provisions." Lond. In a very instructive work of the year 1777 we read: "The great farmer is nearly mounted to a level with him [the gentleman] ; while the poor labourer is depressed almost to the earth. (1864). And when they haue wandered abrode tyll that be spent, what cant they then els doe but steale, and then iustly pardy be hanged, or els go about beggyng. . (3 hours!) only to resume their work. It is the most powerful weapon for repressing strikes, those peri- odical revolts of the wo.'king-class against the autocracy of 436 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION capital. As regards value in general, it is the weak point of the classi- cal school of Political Economy that it nowhere, expressly and with full consciousness, distinguishes between labour, as it appears in the value of a product and the same labour, as it appears in the use-value of that prod- uct. 34.) "To permit, which is tantamount to compelling... * Since the working-day is constant in magnitude, and is represented by a value of constant magnitude, since, to every variation in Che magnitude of surplus-value, there corresponds an inverse variation in the value of labour-power, and since the value of labour-power cannot change, except in consequence of a change in the productiveness of labour, it clearly follows, under these conditions, that every change of magnitude in sur- plus-value arises from an inverse change of magnitude in the value of labour-power. But the sum of the values of the commodities that entered into the process amounts to 27 shillings. Econ. But, mark well, that this quid pro quo exists in the case of any commodity B, only when some other commodity A enters into a value-relation with it, and then only within the limits of this relation. In this roundabout way, then, the fact is expressed, that weaving also, in so far as it weaves value, has nothing to distinguish it from tailoring, and, conse- quently, is abstract human labour. From east to west— from the neighbour- hood of Aberdeen to the crags of Oban — you have now a contin- uous line of forests; while in other parts of the Highlands there are the new forests of Loch Archaig, Glengarry, Glenmoriston, &c. Hence, aft- er its introduction, the society possesses as much, if not more, of the necessaries of life than before, for the labourers thrown out of work; and that quite apart from the enormous share of the annual produce wasted by the non-workers. c, p. We bear in mind, however, that if the value of the coat is double that of 10 yds. These statistics gave 1 "Tenth Report of the Commissioners of H. * 1. So it is with the art of cooking." (Xen. 31,821 33,622 1,801 Cabbages, 9.3 Flax, 301,693 251,433 50.260 Flax, st. Horner in "Reports, &c, for 31st Oct., 1857," pp. The former is more or less directly proportional, the latter to a certain extent inversely proportional, to the use of the machine. But no repair, no improvement shall it receive, except such as its penniless occupants can sup- ply. of Fact, for 31st October, 1865." 2 Rep. Whether that labour is useful for others, and its product consequently capable of satisfying the wants of others, can be proved only by the act of exchange. Th. Hodgskin, "Popul. By carrying on all the different processes at once, whioh an individual must have executed separately, it becomes possible to produce a multitude of pins completely finished in the DIVISION OF LABOUR AND MANUFACTURE 345 co-operative form of the process as a whole; but Manufacture not only finds the conditions for co-operation ready to hand, it also, to some extent, creates them by the sub-division of handicraft labour. Their children, when opium does not give them the finishing stroke, are born recruits of the gang. This law holds generally. Here, it is only at the end of the term that the buyer has actually received the use-value of the commodity. . of Fact., 31 Oct., 1862," pp. The shortness of the time allowed for the work is compensated for by the large mass of labour thrown upon the field of production at the decisive moment. Yet, for all that, the table continues to be that common, every-day thing, wood. Here we have again the principle of co-operation in its sim- plest form, the simultaneous employment of many doing the same thing; only now, this principle is the expression of an organic relation. If we compare the different cases in I. The inhabitants do not go beyond the same or the next parish, parting their two-room tenements into single rooms, and crowding even those. With the exception of the extractive industries, in which the material for labour is provided immediately by Nature, such as mining, hunting, fishing, and agriculture (so far as the latter is confined to breaking up virgin soil), all branches of industry manipulate raw material, objects already filtered through labour, already products of labour. He gives 6 kinds of adulteration of sugar, 9 of olive oil, 10 of nutter, 12 of salt, 19 of milk, 20 of bread, 23 of brandy, 24 of meal, 28 of chocolate, 30 of wine, 32 of coffee, etc. Under these circumstances, tout sera pour le mieux dans le meilleur des mondes possibles. WORKING-DAY CONSTANT. until 1.30 in the afternoon, one set of children between 9 and 13, and from 1.30 p. The working-day for all artificers and field labourers from March to September ought, according to this statute (which, however, could not be enforced), to last from 5 in the morning to between 7 and 8 in the evening. Daire. CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 371 PART IV.— (Continued) PRODUCTION OF RELATIVE SURPLUS-VALUE CHAPTER XV MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY SECT 19 N 1.— THE DEVELOPMENT OF MACHINERY John Stuart Mill says in his "Principles of Political Economy": "It is questionable if all the mechanical inventions yet made have lightened the day's toil of any human being." 1 That is, however, by no means the aim of the capitalistic application of machinery. Neither can it any longer be regarded as the product of the labour of the joiner, the mason, the spinner, or of any other definite kind of productive labour. Senior says, with other things, 712 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION Like all good things in this bad world, this profitable method has its drawbacks. Moreover, all progress in capitalistic agriculture is a prog- ress in the art, not only of robbing the labourer, but of robbing the soil; all progress in increasing the fertility of the soil for a given time, is a progress towards ruining the lasting sources of that fertility. (If the master break the contract, he can be pro- ceeded against only in a civil action, and risks nothing but money damages.) After the workman has served his two months, the master invites him to re- turn to the works, pursuant to the contract. A 6d. Here we may say, with the German proverb: caught together, hung together. 48,980 2,348 Ireland . Finally, the form C gives to the world of commodities a general social relative form of value, because, and in so far as, thereby all commodities, with the exception of one, are excluded from the equivalent form. From that moment it always represents the realised price of some commodity. As regards the extent of the evil, it may suffice to refer to the evidence which Dr. Hunter has compiled from the last census, that destruction of houses, notwithstanding increased local demands for them, had, during the last ten years, been in progress in 821 separate parishes or townships of England, so that irrespectively of persons who had been forced to become non-resident (that is in the parishes in which they work), these parishes and townships were receiving in 1861, as compared with 1 1 1851, a population 5^- per cent, greater, into house-room k-r per cent, less .... It is his deliberate act. To no purpose. That this one-sided character of the money's motion arises out of the two-sided character of the commodity's motion, is a circumstance that is veiled over. The means [of subsistence] being always supposed to be a fixed quantity. The examination of the witnesses on this subject is truly droll. . (Reports, &c, April, 1849, p. England and Wales . The distinction between principal sub- stance and accessory vanishes in the true chemical industries, be- cause there none of the raw material re-appears, in its original composition, in the substance of the product. For the shape assumed by its own value, for the universal equiva- lent. 15.) 2 "Children's Employment Com., III. 1860.-1.115,890,608 lbs. 2 The different proportions in which different sorts of labour are reduced to unskilled labour as their standard, are established by a social process that goes on behind the backs of the producers, and, consequently, appear to be fixed by custom. If, then, in form G we replace the linen by gold, we get, B. m. I give below a summary of the result. for it. "Their powers are always upon the stretch, they cannot live cheaper than they do, nor work harder." 2 Protestantism, by changing almost all the traditional holidays into workdays, plays an important part in the genesis of capital. Oct. The value of labour-power resolves itself into the value of a definite quantity of the means of subsistence. One old woman was burnt to death in the flames of the hut, which she refused to leave. The mode of production in which the product takes the form of a commodity, or is produced directly for exchange, is the most general and most embryonic form of bourgeois production. But this capitalist soul of theirs is so intimately wedded, in the head of the political economist, to their material substance, that he christens them capital under all circumstances, even when they are its exact opposite. . ought the government then to work in opposition to this division of labour, and to hinder its natural course? On the other hand, the old capi- tal periodically reproduced with change of composition, repels more and more of the labourers formerly employed by it. II, p 150.) 2 "L'ouvrier prete son industrie," but adds Storch slyly: he "risks noth- ing" except "de perdre son salaire ... The natural tendency of circulation to convert coins into a mere semblance of what they profess to be, into a symbol of the weight of metal they are offi- cially supposed to contain, is recognised by modern legislation, which fixes the loss of weight sufficient to demonetise a gold coin, or to make it no longer legal tender. — In Marx's copy there is here the marginal note: "Here note for working out later; if the extension is only quantitative, then for a greater and a smaller capital in the same branch of business the profits are as the magnitudes of the capitals advanced. EXPROPRIATION OF AGRICULTURAL POPULATION 719 sheep-walks was, therefore, its cry. x The last part of this statute provides, that certain poor people may be employed by a place or by persons, who are willing to give them food and drink and to find them work. On this sup- position, the 23 half-hours yield an annual product of £1 15,000; one half- hour yields 1/23X^115,000; 20 half-hours yield 20/23x^115,000=^100,000, i.e., they replace no more than the capital advanced. Relative surplus- value is, on the contrary, directly proportional to that productive- ness. The division of labour within the society brings into con- tact independent commodity-producers, who acknowledge no oth- er authority but that of competition, of the coercion exerted by the pressure of their mutual interests; just as in the animal kingdom, the bellum omnium contra omnes more or less preserves the condi- tions of existence of every species. Cloth, during the last six months of 1866, was almost unsaleable. Whenever fiom an extraordinary demand for manufactures, labour grows scarce, the labour- ers feel their own consequence, and will make their masters feel it like- wise — it is amazing; but so depraved are the dispositions of these people, that in such cases a set of workmen have combined to distress the employer by idling a whole day together." ("Essay, &c," pp. One step already spontaneously taken towards effecting this revolution is the establishment of technical and agricultural schools, and of "ecoles d'enseignement professional," in which the children of the working-men receive some little instruction in technology and in the practical handling of the various im- plements of labour. The mode of this distribution will vary with the productive organisation of the community, and the degree of historical development attained by the producers. 10 by 6 ft. Eight additional sub-inspectors were appoint- ed in 1871. This value is determined by the labour-time required for its production, and is expressed by the quantity of any other commodity that costs the same amount of labour- time. — Or, on the other hand, accumulation slackens in consequence of the rise in the price of labour, because the stimulus of gain is blunted. I am convinced that by proper supervision of scutching mills a vast sacrifice of life and limb would be averted." 1 What could possibly show better the character of the capi- talist mode of production, than the necessity that exists for forcing upon it, by Acts of Parliament, the simplest appliances for maintaining cleanliness and health? but whoever takes more or better than he gives, that is usury, and is not service, but wrong done to his neighbour, as when one steals and robs. The antagonism between the manufacturing division of labour and the methods of Modern Industry makes itself forci- bly felt. m.; then it might attend for 3 or 4 days consecutively, or for a week, then it would not appear in school for 3 weeks or a month, after that upon some odd days at some odd hours when the opera- tive who employed it chose to spare it; and thus the child was, as it were, buffeted from school to work, from work to school, until the tale of 150 hours was told." 1 By the excessive addition of women and children to the ranks of the workers, machinery at last breaks down the resistance which the male operatives in the manufacturing period continued to oppose to the despotism of capital. Almost all of them bemoan the slavery of the factory operative. When the process of depopulation has com- pleted itself, the result, says Dr. Hunter, is a show-village where the cottages have been reduced to a few, and where none but persons who are needed as shepherds, gardeners, or game-keepers, are allowed to live; regular servants who receive the good treat- ment usual to their class. The common and very imperfect bellows of the blacksmith is, in England, occasionally converted into a blowing-engine, by cdnne ting its arm with a steam- engine. 173.) "Nous rencontrons chez les peuples parvenus a un certain degr6 de civilisation trois genres de divisions d'industrie: la premiere, que nous nommerons generale, amene la distinction des producteurs en agriculteurs, manufacturiers et com- mercants, elle se rapporte aux trois principales branches d'industrie natio- nale; la seconde, qu'on pourrait appeler sp^ciale, e9t la division de chaque genre d'industrie en especes ... Its value is quantitatively expressed by the fact, that a definite quantity of B is exchangeable with a definite quantity of A. have nothing to stir them up to be serviceable but their wants which it is 1 Karl Marx, I. On the one hand, the enormous and ceaseless stream of men, year after year driven upon America, leaves behind a stationary sedi- ment in the east of the United States, the wave of immigration from Europe throwing men on the labour-market there more rapid- ly than the wave of emigration westwards can wash them away. IV. 28. And the Nuisances Removal Acts .... The general value-form, which represents all products of labour as mere congelations of undifferentiated human labour, shows by its very structure that it is the social resume of the world of commodities. The same oper- ations which, in the case of a papermaker belonging to a German Guild, merged one into the other as the successive acts of one arti- ficer, became in the Dutch paper manufacture so many partial oper- ations carried on side by side by numerous co-operating labour- ers. "It is extraordinarily fatiguing work. For an example of labour in common or directly associated labour, we have no occasion to go back to that spontaneously developed form which we find on the threshold of the history of all civilised races. Wages amount to £52 a week. * ing: 1851, 26,940: 1861, 26,130— fall in consequence of the competition of machinery. The mediaeval peasant produced quit-rent-corn for his feudal lord and tithe-corn for his parson. In the trade in which it is being em- ployed, it must possess the average skill, handiness and quickness prevalent in that trade, and our capitalist took good care to buy labour-power of such normal goodness. Reports, &c, for 31st October, 1850, pp. '231.) THE GENERAL FORM ULA FOR CAPITAL 151 does in M— C— M. Each moulder, who is always a skilled labourer, and the chief of a group, supplies his 7 subordinates with board and lodging in his cottage. c, Vol I., Book II., Ch. I., p. Twelve hours' work, as is evident from the facts ad- duced, is now compressed into less than 10 hours. The value of the commodity linen is expressed by the bodily form of the commodity coat, the value of one by the use-value of the other. "Ex- change," he says, "cannot take place without equality, and equal- ity not without commensurability" (out' igottj; jjtj obarfc aujAjAsipiac). They abolished the feudal tenure of land, i.e., they got rid of all its obligations to the State, "indemnified" the State by taxes on the peasantry and the rest of the mass of the people, vindicated for themselves the rights of modern private property in estates to which they had only a feudal title, and, finally, passed those laws of settle- ment, which, mutatis mutandis, had the same effect on the Eng- lish agricultural labourer, as the edict of the Tartar Boris Godunof on the Russian peasantry. Then, making the same assump- tions as in former instances, the real degree of exploitation of labour will be represented in the following proportions. "We thus see," he pro- ceeds, "that profit arises, not from the incident of exchange, but from the productive power of labour; and the general profit of the country is always what the productive power of labour makes it, whether any exchange takes place or not. Only such products can become commodities with regard to each other, as result from different kinds of labour, each kind being carried on independ- ently and for the account of private individuals. Despite the important part which this method plays in actual practice, we are excluded from considering it in this place, by our assumption, that all commodi- ties, including labour-power, are bought and sold at their full val- ue. 348 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION system on its own foundation. 108, n. The Grown lands thus fraudulently appropriated, together with the robbery of the Church estates, as far as these had not been lost again during the republican revolution, form the basis of the to-day princely domains of the English oligarchy. 2.) "L'argent n'est pas simple signe, car*il est lui-meme rich- esse; il ne represente pas les valeurs, il les equivaut." (Le Trosne, I. In the ordinary run of things, the labourer can be left to the "natural laws of production," i.e., to his dependence on capital, a dependence springing from, and guaranteed in perpetuity by, the conditions of production themselves. ' Let us now consider the residue of each of these products; it consists of the same unsubstantial reality in each, a mere con- gelation of homogeneous human labour, of labour-power expend- ed without regard to the mode of its expenditure. 2 We must never forget that even the serf was not only the owner, if but a tribute-paying owner, of the piece of land attached to his house, but 718 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION feudal production is characterised by division of the soil amongst the greatest possible number of sub-feudatories. * But we have no need to refer to the origin of capital in order to dis- cover that the first form of appearance of capital is money. The facts that lie at the bottom of this dogma are these: on the one hand, the la- bourer has no right to interfere in the division of social wealth into means of enjoyment for the non-labourer and means of production. It could not be increased at will, it failed at certain seasons of the year, and, above all, it was essentially local.* Not till the invention of Watt's second and so-called double-acting steam-engine, was a prime mover found, that begot its own force by the consump- tion of coal and water, whose power was entirely under man's control, that was mobile and a means of locomotion, that was urban and not, like the water-wheel, rural, that permitted pro- duction to be concentrated in towns instead of, like the water- wheels, being scattered up and down the country, 3 that was of universal technical application, and, relatively speaking, 1 Faulhaber, 1625; De Caus, 1688. • 1. "It requires no further argument to prove that the educational clauses of the Factory Act, being held in such disfavour among mill-owners, tend in a great measure to exclude that class of children alike from the em- ployment and the benefit of education contemplated by this Act." a Horribly grotesque does this appear in print works, which are regulated by a special Act. 709.) "You would still be prepared, would you," (flint-hearted fellow!) "to prevent their obtaining a livelihood by these means?" "I would." (n. 's time, in taxes pour le roi de Prusse. Just as a change in the value of the means of production, even after they have commenced to take a part in the labour- process, does not alter their character as constant capital, so, too, a change in the proportion of constant to variable capital does not affect the respective functions of these two kinds of capital. He is then engaged in a rapid and continuous labour for about five hours— throwing out the dough, 'scaling it off,' moulding it, putting it into the oven, preparing and baking rolls and fancy bread, taking the batch bread out of the oven, and up in- to the shop, &c, &c. . Let us take two commodities such as a coat and 10 yards of linen, and let the former be double the value of the latter, so that, if 10 yards of linen =W, the coat=2W. (Maurer, Fronhofe iv. The crisis of 1866, which fell most heavily on London, created in this centre of the world-market, more populous than the kingdom of Scotland, an increase of pauperism for the year 1866 of 19.5% compared with 1865, and of 24.4% compared with 1864, and a still greater increase for the first months of 1867 as compared with 1866. On the other hand, if s=0, or in other words, if the labour-power, whose value is advanced in the form of variable capital, were to produce only its equivalent, we should have C=c+v or C the value of the product =(c+v)+0 or G— C. The simplest value-relation is evidently that of one commod- ity to some one other commodity of a different kind. It will be remembered how this law was carried out in the country districts: in the form of alms the parish made up the nominal wage to the nominal sum required for the simple veg- etation of the labourer. What the latter sells is his labour-power. 2 781 towns given in the census for 1861 for England and Wales "con- tained 10,960,998 inhabitants, while the villages and country parishes con- tained 9,105,226. 53, seq. The price of labour-power and the degree of its exploitation cease to be commensurable quantities. Profits ... The steam-engine has worked wonders in the way of drainage. CREATION OF THE HOME-MARKET FOR INDUSTRIAL CAPITAL THe expropriation and expulsion of the agricultural popular tion, intermittent but renewed again and again, supplied, as we saw, the town industries with a mass of proletarians entirely uncon- nected with the corporate guilds and unfettered by them; a for- tunate circumstance that makes old A. It is now very generally combed in the factory, and hand-labour is supersed- ed, except in some particular kinds of work, in which hand-combed wool is still preferred. x Suppose a capitalist to employ 100 workmen, at £30 a year each, in a carpet factory. This primitive accumulation plays in Political Economy about the same part as original sin in theology. She gets the young ones ready for school. may signify on the one hand an ounce weight of gold, and on the other, the value of a ton of iron, this reckoning name of money has been called its mint-price. 4 It says, "But if it should seem fit to Parliament to place the whole of that large number of children, young persons and females under the protec- tive legislation above adverted to. Gold, as gold, is exchange-value itself. 1 Ure, 1. And although this reproduction is a mere repetition of the process of production on the old scale, yet this mere repetition, or continuity, gives a new character to the process, or, rather, causes the disap- pearance of some apparent characteristics which it possessed as an isolated discontinuous process. 3 Gladstone, House of Commons, 7th April, 1864. Thus the Factory Inspector's report on the period of the cri- sis from 1857 to 1858: "It may seem inconsistent that there should be any over- working at a time when trade is so bad; but that very badness leads to the transgression by unscrupulous men, they get the ex- tra profit of it In the last half year, says Leonard Hor- ner, 122 mills in my district have been given up; 143 were found standing," yet, over-work is continued beyond the legal hours. It soon 1 "Labour the exclusive standard of value ... 1. The average income of these small landlords. In Mr. Horner's district 10,270 adult male labourers were thus examined in 181 factories. But let us finish — Mill is willing to concede, "that he should do so is not a matter of inherent necessity."* On the contrary: "the labourer might wait, until the production is complete, for all that part of his wages whicn exceeds mere necessaries; and even for the whole, if he has funds in hand sufficient for his temporary support. .of food than the other members of the family, including in the poor- er districts nearly all the meat and bacon .... It is they that sweep away the handicraftsman's work as the regulating principle of social production. without coming irresistibly to the conclusion that such abuses of the power of parents and of employers can no longer be al- lowed to exist." 2 "The practice of boys working at all by day and night turns either in the usual course of things, or at pressing times, seems inevitably to open the door to their not unfrequently working unduly long hours. It reaches, therefore, in that year, the time for its periodical reproduction, for its replacement by new ones of the same kind. Further, if a horse must fully maintain its health, it can work no more than 8 hours a day. In the infancy of capitalist production, things often happened as in the infancy of mediseval towns, where the question, which of the escaped serfs should be master and which servant, was in great part decided by the earlier or later date of their flight. of linen must have the same value as one coat. . 118, 119, 120, 126, sqq. It is more likely that silver will for- feit its money function more and more in the markets of the world. The raw material serves now merely as an absorbent of a definite quantity of labour. If then, on the one hand, the capitalist mode of production presents itself to us historically, as a necessary condition to the transformation of the labour-process into a social process, so, on the other hand, this social form of the labour-process presents it- self, as a method employed by capital for the more profitable ex- ploitation of labour, by increasing that labour's productiveness. Now, however, property turns out to be the right, on the part of the capitalist, to appropriate the unpaid labour of others or its product, and to be the impossibility, on the part of the labourer, of appropriating his own product. But the change, which the value of the commodity undergoes in this process, is limited to a change in its money-form. * In the first place then we equate the constant capital to zero. of the Strand . Mr. Peel had the foresight to bring with him, besides, 3,000 persons of the working-class, men, women, and children. All of these, I believe, are either directly or indi- rectly induced by the impure, overheated air of the apartments in which the hands are employed, and the want of sufficient comfortable clothing to protect them from the cold, damp atmosphere, in winter, when going to their homes." (1. And whether it had been oth- erwise possible for England, to have carried on her Woollen Manufacture to so great a perfection?" (Berkeley. ur . Mr. Turner was, in 1827, rector of Wilmslow, in Chesh- ire, a manufacturing district. CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO CAPITAL 585 The fact that this particular commodity, labour-power, pos- sesses the peculiar use-value of supplying labour, and therefore of creating value, cannot affect the general law of commodity produc- tion. 68, gave the regulation of the wages of silk-weavers to the justices of the peace; still, in 1706, it required two judgments of the higher courts to decide, whether the mandates of justices of the peace as to wages held good also for non-agricultural labourers; still, in 1799, an act of 1 From a clause of Statute 2 James I., c. 40.) MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 393 further, since the actual wage of the labourer at one time sinks below the value of his labour-power, at another rises above it, it is possible for the difference between the price of the machinery and the price of the labour-power replaced by that machinery to vary very much, although the difference between the quantity of labour requisite to produce the machine and the total quantity replaced by it, remain constant. The capitalist, on the other hand, who makes him do, besides these 8 hours, say 4 hours' surplus-labour, requires an addi- tional sum of money for furnishing the additional means of produc- tion. Two coats may therefore express the quantity of value of 40 yards of linen, but they can never express the quantity of their own value. "I work till 9 o'clock at night six days in the week. The poor and idle are a necessary consequence of the rich and active," &c. 1 Apart from its exchange for other commodities at the source of its production, gold, in whose-so-ever hands it may be, is the transformed shape of some commodity alienated by its owner; it is the product of a sale or of the first metamorphosis G — M. The contradiction of these two diametrically opposed economic systems, manifests itself here practically in a struggle between them. If therefore he thought about the matter at all, he would for- mulate the problem of the formation of capital as follows: How can we account for the origin of capital on the supposition that prices are regulated by the average price, i.e., ultimately by the value of the commodities? The payment of 300 workmen at once, though only for one day, requires a greater outlay of capital, than does the payment of a smaller number of men, week by week, during a whole year. 413, 419, 417.) 1 "On Whitsuntide, 1824," says Mr. Craig before the Commons' Com- mittee of 1826, "there was such an immense demand for notes upon the banks of Edinburgh, that by 11 o'clock they had not a note left in their custody. . As on the first day of production, the original produce-formers, now turned into the creators of the material elements of capital — man and Na- ture—still work together. On the 9th September instant, Mr. Kelson, surgeon, reported to me further cases of small-pox in the same huts, and he described their condition as most dis- l. G. That which seems to throb there is my own heart-beating. 2 Towards the end of the 16th century, mortars and sieves were still used in France for pounding and washing ores. . The latter, combined with the more intense strain on the workman, have had the effect, that at least as much is produced in the shortened (by two hours or one- sixth) working-day as was previously produced during the long- er one." 1 One fact is sufficient to show how greatly the wealth of the manufacturers increased along with the more intense exploita- tion of labour-power. The price of labour, at the moment when demand and supply are in equilibrium, is its natural price, determined independently of the relation of demand and supply. And how? "The quantity of coin in every country is regulated by the value of the commodities which are to be circulated by it.... Hence, for a given interval of time dur- ing the process of circulation, we have the following relation: the quantity of money functioning as the circulating medium is equal to the sum of the prices of the commodities divided by the number of moves made by coins of the same denomination. We are here no more concerned about the facts, that the labour is the specific work of spinning, that its subject is cotton and its product yarn, than we are about the fact that the subject itself is already a product and therefore raw material. per lb. Like all other commodities, it was also capable of serving as an equivalent, either as simple equivalent in isolated exchanges, or as particular equivalent by the side of others. The former has nothing to do with the absolute length of the working-day, and may occur just as well in a working-day of 15, as of 6 hours. 123). 14, 15. These exami- nations furnish valuable material in other connexions also. They give up to the product that value alone which they themselves lose as means of production. Here it is trumpeted forth as a tri- umph of English statecraft that at the Peace of Utrecht, England extorted from the Spaniards by the Asiento Treaty the privilege of being allowed to ply the negro-trade, until then only carried on between Africa and the English West Indies, between Africa and Spanish America as well. 8 Before his time, spinning machines, although very imperfect ones, had already been used, and Italy was probably the country of their first appear- ance. To what an extent the old forms of the instru- ments of production influenced their new forms at first starting, is shown by, amongst other things, the most superficial comparison of the present power- loom with the old one, of the modern blowing apparatus of a blast-furnace with the first inefficient mechanical reproduction of the ordinary bellows, and perhaps more strikingly than in any other way, by the attempts before the invention of the present locomotive, to construct a locomotive that actu- ally had two feet, which after the fashion of a horse, it raised alternately from the ground. He fed, clothed, and lodged the children, and gave them a small allowance of money. of cotton must vanish into dust, before 100 lbs. If the professor then found, that in accordance with the calculation of the manufacturers, the workman reproduced or replaced his wages in 2 half-hours, in that case, he should have continued his analysis thus: According to your figures, the workman in the last hour but one produces his wages, and in the last hour your surplus-value or net profit. Then one use-value is just as good as another, provided only it be present in sufficient quantity. We say labour, i.e., the expenditure of his vital force by the spinner, and not spinning labour, because the special work of spinning counts here, only so far as it is the expenditure of labour-power in general, and not in so far as it is the specific work of the spinner. 1 whose industry holds second place in the world, without on that account entirely losing their colonial character."— F. Their value therefore rises absolutely, but not in proportion to their mass. The labour required for the production of the cotton, the raw material of the yarn, is part of the labour necessary to pro- duce the yarn, and is therefore contained in the yarn. Engels' "Lage, etc." pp 249-51. 168). d. Our machine is always stopped for dinner. Children of too tender an age are sent adrift. (1. Two points characterise this kind of con- centration which grows directly out of, or rather is identical with, accumulation. Raw material forms the substance of the product, but only after it has changed its form. 135,831 lbs. of yarn on the one hand, and in the 10 lbs. This is an essential element of the so-called primitive accumulation. Here the political economist thinks he sees the 1 Economist, Jan. We worked last winter till 9 (evening), and the winter before till 10. I con- sidered it useless to prosecute more for this evasion of the law. The absentee landlords bleed this poor rook- ery too freely. But it by no means follows from this that the most fruitful soil is the most fitted for the growth of the capitalist mode of produc- tion. 84, n. As regards the fluctuations of prices generally, they are subject to the laws of elementary relative value investigated in a former chapter. "It is not at all uncommon in Nottingham to find 14 to 20 children huddled together in a small room, of, perhaps, not more than 12 feet square, and employed for 15 hours out of the 24, at work that of itself is exhausting, from its weariness and monoto- ny, and is besides carried on under every possible unwholesome condition. Whilst the bill was under discussion, the Factory Inspectors laid before Parliament statistics of the infa- mous abuses due to this anomaly. In order, however, to attain the ratio of 100:100 they must be equal. In the Eng- lish letter-press printing trade, for example, there existed formerly a system, corresponding to that in the old manufactures and handicrafts, of advancing the apprentices from easy to more and more difficult work. c, p. Comm., III. 2 "No one... Econ." Lond., 1821, p. This is essentially the result of a revolution in the mode of production of both metals. (G. In the making of jewellery, just as in spinning, the surplus-value results only from a quanti- tative excess of labour, from a lengthening-out of one and the same labour-process, in the one case, of the process of making jewels, in the other of the process of making yarn. 765 CHAPTER XXXIII THE MODERN THEORY OF COLONISATION 1 Political Economy confuses on principle two very different kinds of private property, of which one rests on the producers' own labour, the other on the employment of the labour of others. In many of the manufacturing districts, but par- ticularly, I am afraid, in the guilty county to which I belong [Lancashire], cruelties the most heart-rending were practised upon the unoffending and friendless creatures who were thus con- signed to the charge of master-manufacturers; they were harassed to the brink of death by excess of labour . 31st, 1866, proves by comparative statistics with Continental states, that in spite of lower wages and much longer working-time, Continental labour is, in propor- tion to the product, dearer than English. Horrocks and Jacson. . x Necessary, as regards the la- bourer, because independent of the particular social form of his labour; necessary, as regards capital, and the world of capital- ists, because on the continued existence of the labourer depends their existence also. 147,284 . The fall in the val- ue of labour-power, caused by the disappearance or diminution of the expenses of apprenticeship, implies a direct increase of sur- plus-value for the benefit of capital; for everything that shortens the necessary labour-time required for the reproduction of labour- power, extends the domain of surplus-labour. It is not possible to bring out the cretinism of his standpoint, except by his own words: "Les classes condamnees a produire et a consommer diminuent, et les classes qui dirigent le travail, qui soulagent, consolent, et eclairent toute la population, se multiplient . It was £3,000, it is now £3,600. From the nature of a population, an increase of labourers cannot be brought into market in consequence of a particular demand till after the lapse of 16 or 18 years, and the conversion of revenue into capital, by saving, may take place much more rapidly; a country is always liable to an increase in the quantity of the funds for the maintenance of labour faster than the increase of population." 2 After Political Economy has thus demonstrated the constant production of a relative surplus-popu- lation of labourers to be a necessity of capitalistic accumulation, she very aptly, in the guise of an old maid, puts in the mouth of her "beau ideal" of a capitalist the following words addressed to those supernumeraries thrown on the streets by their own crea- tion of additional capital: — "We manufacturers do what we can for you, whilst we are increasing that capital on which you must 1 H. The less value it gives up, so much the more productive it is, and so much the more its services approxi- mate to those of natural forces. If the labour- fund constantly flows to him in the form of money that pays for his labour, it is because the product he has created moves constant- ly away from him in the form of capital. or 7s. Vacheron & Constan- ts, in which machinery has been employed with success, produces at the most three or four different varieties of size and form 2 In watchmaking, that classical example of heterogeneous manufac- ture, we may study with great accuracy the above-mentioned differentiation and specialisation of the instruments of labour caused by the sub-division of handicrafts. Under these circum- stances the price of a working-hour is 3d., the value produced in it is 6d. c, "A egalite d 'oppression des masses, plus un pays a de proletaires et plus il est riche." (Golins, "L'Economie Politique. A "barbarising tend- ency of dispersion" of producers and national wealth. m. c, p. But it never enters into Owen's head to pre-suppose the production of com- modities, and at the same time, by juggling with money, to try to evade the necessary conditions of that production. 587 "laws ol capitalist appropriation.") has been added to the English text in conformity with the 4th German edi- tion.—/^. xv., p. 5 "In the Highlands of Scotland," says Buchanan, the commentator on Adam Smith, 1814, "the ancient state of property is daily subverted.... Tor- por seized them. On the other hand, in the circulation M— C— M, both the money and the commodity rep- resent only different modes of existence of value itself, the money its general mode, and the commodity its particular, or, so to say, disguised mode. — F. 1 In the circuit G — M — G, the same piece of money changes its place twice. On promoting that power their attention is fixed and almost exclusively fixed." (R. Here it is a question merely of the time occu- pied by the labourer in doing the work; of the period during which the labour-power is usefully expended. 696 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION It exists for the enrichment of the large farmers, 1 and indirectly of the landlords. 82, note.) Very true, Mr. Professor! the oil produced by the oil mill is indeed something very different from the labour expended in constructing the mill! By value, Mr. Roscher understands such stuff as "oil," because oil has value, notwithstand- ing that "Nature" produces petroleum, though relatively "in small quanti- ties," a fact to which he seems to refer in his further observation: "It (Nature) produces scarcely any exchange-value." Mr. Roscher's "Nature" and the ex- change-value it produces are rather like the foolish virgin who admitted in- deed that she had had a child, but "it was such a little one." This "savant serieux" in continuation remarks: "Ricardo's school is in the habit of in- cluding capital as accumulated labour under the head of labour. Before the famine, the great mass of agricultural wages were paid in kind, only the smallest part in money; to-day, pay- ment in money is the rule. It regulates all foundries, smithies, and metal manufactories, including ma- chine shops; furthermore glass-works, paper mills, gutta-percha and india- rubber works, tobacco manufactories, letter-press printing and book-binding works, and, lastly, all workshops in which more than 50 persons are em- ployed. of Fact, for 30th June, 1857," p. Reflection and fancy are subject to err; but a habit of moving the hand or the foot is independent of either. We have here, therefore, a palpable difference between the circulation of money as capital, and its circulation as mere money. Besides this, he includes the wages of the people employed at odd times to keep the machinery in working order. They see no essential difference between them, and even give the name of machine to the simple mechanical powers, the lever, the inclined plane, the screw, the 1 Mill should have said, "of any human being not fed by other people's ur," for, without doubt, machinery has greatly increased the number labour, of well-to-do idlers 372 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION wedge, &c. The continuous superseding of the agricul- tural labourers, in spite of their diminishing number and the in- creasing mass of their products, gives birth to their pauperism. Nevertheless, the compensation of a decrease in the number of labourers employed, or of the amount of variable capital advanced, by a rise in the rate of surplus-value, or by the lengthening of the working-day, has impassable limits. c. 108, 109. We begin with the case in which the working-day is short- ened. The Money-form 20 yards of linen = "| 1 coat = 10 lbs. After remarking that the horse-power of steam-engines, being always estimated in the of- ficial returns according to the power of similar engines in 1828, * is only nominal, and can serve only as an index of their real power, he goes on to say: "I am confident that from the same weight of steam-engine machinery, we are now obtaining at least 50 per cent, more duty or work performed on the average, and that in many cases the identical steam-engines which in the days of the restricted speed of 220 feet per minute, yielded 50 horse-power, are now yielding upwards of 100." .... of Fact., 31st October, 1863," pp. This realisation transfers the commodity from the seller to the buyer and removes the money from the hands of the buyer into those of the seller, where it again goes through the same process with another, commodity. Hie Rhodus, hie salta! 1 From the foregoing investigation, the reader will see that this state- ment only means that the formation of capital must be possible even though the price and value of a commodity be the same; for its formation cannot be attributed to any deviation of the one from the other. Comm., Fourth Rep.," 1865, pp. It therefore follows that the elemen- tary value-form is also the primitive form under which a product of labour appears historically as a commodity, and that the grad- ual transformation of such products into commodities, proceeds pari passu with the development of the value-form. Hence the circuit made by one commodity in the course of its metamorphoses is inextricably mixed up with the circuits of other commodities. The exploitation of the labourer by capital is here effected through the exploitation of the labourer by the labourer. Why could not boys learn their handicraft in the day-time? 2 Hence this subversion of agriculture puts on, at first, more the appearance of a political revolution. (n. 32.) The author of this anonymous work: G. Let the value of the means of produc- tion used up in each article be sixpence. 466,825 yds. This corvee soon developed into a servile relationship existing in point of fact, not in point of law, until Russia, the liberator of the world, made it legal under pretence of abolishing serfdom. First, the labourer works under the control of the 1 By a wonderful feat of logical acumen, Colonel Torrens has discov- ered, in this stone of the savage the origin of capital. 2 In those industries, such as potteries, where machinery plays little or no part, the 1 There are, of course, always differences in the intensities of the labour in various industries But these differences are, as Adam Smith has shown, compensated to a partial extent by minor circumstances, peculiar to each sort of labour. 48, note.) All honour to Mal- thus that he lays stress on the lengthening of the hours of labour, a fact to which he elsewhere in his pamphlet draws attention, while Ricardo and others, in face of the most notorious tacts, make invariability in the length of the working day the groundwork of all their investigations. E. 262. His summary, too, of the history of agri- culture, although not free from gross errors, contains flashes of light. The necessary labour which the Wallachian peasant does for his own maintenance is distinctly marked off from his surplus-labour on behalf of the Boyard. 430 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION workpeople more productive. We may here remark, that the language of commodities has, besides Heb- rew, many other more or less correct dialects. 2 "Public Health, eighth report, 1866," p. 2 From the law: "the price of labour being given, the daily or weekly wage depends on the quantity of labour expended," it follows, first of all, that, the lower the price of labour, the greater must be the quantity of labour, or the longer must be the working- day for the labourer to secure even a miserable average wage. Still the two fundamental forms must be briefly worked out here. This latter weight l of yarn contains, it is true, by weight, no more than 13-^- lbs. Beecher Stowe, authoress of "Uncle Tom's Cabin," with great magnificence in London to show her sympathy for the negro slaves of the American republic — a sym- pathy that she prudently forgot, with her fellow-aristocrats, during the civ- il war, in which every "noble" English heart beat for the slave-owner — I gave in the New York Tribune the facts about the Sutherland slaves. If we had been sure of retaining the labour of such emigrants, we should have been glad to have engaged it at once, and for a high price: and we should have engaged it, even though we had been sure it would leave us, provided we had been sure of a fresh supply whenever we might need it." 2 After Wakefield has contrasted the English capitalist agri- culture and its "combined" labour with the scattered cultivation of American peasants, he unwittingly gives us a glimpse at the reverse of the medal. 2 On the other hand, only in favourable and exception- law. 3 But what avails lamentation in the face of historical necessity? A law peculiar to the circulation of paper money can spring up only from the proportion in which that paper money represents gold. An analysis and comparison of the prices of commodities produced by handicrafts or manufactures, and of the prices of the same commodities produced by machinery, shows generally, that, in the product of machinery, the value due to the instru- ments of labour increases relatively, but decreases absolutely. in this one workhouse . (J. At the head is the gang-master, always an ordinary agricultural labourer, generally what is called a bad lot, a scapegrace, unsteady, drunken, but with a dash of enterprise and savoir faire. 36, sq. A mass of free proletarians was hurled on the labour-market by the breaking-up of the bands of feudal retainers, who, as Sir James Steuart well says, "everywhere uselessly filled house and castle." Although the royal power, itself a product of bourgeois develop- ment, in its strife after absolute sovereignty forcibly hastened on the dissolution of these bands of retainers, it was by no means the sole cause of it. It belongs to the clothes merchant. The whole system of capitalist production is based on the fact that the workman sells his labour-power as a commodity. To introduce it into the calculation would make no difference. 1 But no sooner does coin leave the mint, than it im- mediately finds itself on the high-road to the melting pot. 3 'Report of the Officer of Health of St. Martins-in-the-Fieids, 1865.' 1 - * 'Public Health, eighth report, 1866, p. The shameless lav- ishing of uncultivated colonial land on aristocrats and capitalists by the Government, so loudly denounced even by Wakefield, has produced, especially in Australia, * in conjunction with the stream of men that the gold-diggings attract, and with the competition that the importation of English commodities causes even to the smallest artisan, an ample "relative surplus labouring population," so that almost every mail brings the Job's news of a "glut of the 1 As soon as Australia became her own law-giver, she passed, oi course, laws favourable to the settlers, but the squandering of the land, already ac- complished by the English Government, stands in the way. 1 Let us now return to our would-be capitalist. the average annual increase of income from 1853-1864 was only 0.93; whilst, in the same period, in Great Britain, it was 4.58. m., and all after that is over-time." 1 (Does this Mr. Smith take no meals himself during 10y hours?) "We (this same Smith) sel- dom leave off working before 6 p. they took a course to take away depopulating inclosures, and depopulating pasturage." An Act of Henry VII., 1489, cap. 1 Although the Physiocrats could not penetrate the mystery of sur- plus-value, yet this much was clear to them, viz., that it is "une richesse independante et disponible qu'il (the possessor) n'a point achetee et qu'il vend." (Turgot: "Reflexions sur la Formation et la Distribution des Richesses," p. In proportion as exchange bursts its local bonds, and the value of commodities more and more expands into an embodi- ment of human labour in the abstract, in the same proportion the character of money attaches itself to commodities that are by Nature fitted to perform the social function of a universal equiv- alent. If their natural endowments are, on the one hand, the foundation on which the di- vision of labour is built up, on the other hand, Manufacture, once introduced, develops in them new powers that are by nature fitted only for limited and special functions. SECTION 2.— THE TWO-FOLD CHARACTER OF THE LABOUR EMBODIED IN COMMODITIES At first sight a commodity presented itself to us as a complex of two things — use-value and exchange-value. But capital has one single life impulse, the tendency to create value and, surplus-value, to make its constant factor, the means of production, absorb the great- est possible amount of surplus-labour. lid., and that from this sum was deducted the rent of the house, the manufacturer, however, re- turning half the rent as a gift. The particular tracks pursued by the different species of coin in currency, run naturally into each other. The equivalence of their values is rather a necessary condition to its normal course. Fanatically bent on making value ex- pand itself, he ruthlessly forces the human race to produce for pro- duction's sake; he thus forces the development of the productive powers of society, and creates those material conditions, which alone can form the real basis of a higher form of society, a society in which the full and free development of every individual forms the ruling principle. They are thenceforth an industrial perpetuum mobile, that would go on producing forever, did it not meet with certain natural obstructions in the weak bodies and the strong wills of its human attendants. All punishments naturally resolve themselves into fines and deductions from wages, and the law-giving talent of the factory Lycurgus so arranges matters, that a violation of his laws is, if possible, more profitable to him than the keeping of them. Besides other causes, the division of property, within capitalist families, plays a great part in this. By labour-power or capacity for labour is to be understood the aggregate of those mental and physical capabilities existing in a human being, which he exercises whenever he produces a use-value of any description. In 1836, 12,000 wind-mills of 6,000 horse-power were still employed in Hol- land, to prevent two-thirds of the land from being reconverted into morasses. In one case 12 x 1,200 working- hours, and in the other 12 such hours are incorporated in the prod- uct. . Cf. F. Chandlery, 1851, 4,949: 1861, 4,686. 3d which was formerly priced at 4s. The landlord, without regard to the hereditary tenant (a category used in error here), now offers his land to the highest bidder, who, if he is an improver, in- stantly adopts a new system of cultivation. 280, 277.) "Do you not think that the effect of having these inspectors examining the collieries so frequently would be to shift the re- sponsibility (!) of supplying proper ventilation from the owners of the collieries to the Government officials?" "No, I do not think that, I think that they should make it their business to enforce the Acts which are already in existence." (n. Its function is merely to serve as the material in which the value of the first commodity is expressed. Gommensurately with the development of capitalist produc- tion and accumulation there develop the two most powerful levers of centralisation — competition and credit. The creation of surplus-value, and therefore the conversion of money into capital, can consequently be explained neither on the assumption that commodities are sold above their value, nor that they are bought below their value. If the slaves attempt any- thing against the masters, they are also to be executed. Note further: Although Malthus was a par- son of the English State Church, he had taken the monastic vow of celibacy — one of the conditions of holding a Fellowship in Protestant Cambridge Univer- sity: "Socios collegiorura maritos esse non permittimus, sed statim postquam quis uxorem duxerit, socius collegii desinat esse." ("Reports of Cambridge University Commission," p. 543.) 8 "Ce ne sont pas les contractants qui prononcent sur la valeur; elle est decidee avant la convention." (Le Trosne, p. 3 And subsequent sales, by other producers, unfollowed by purchases, merely bring about the distribution of the newly produced precious metals among all the owners of commodities. Hence a working-day of more intense labour is embodied in more products than is one of less intense labour, the length of each day being the same. ath-ra Imona ns per males. Mr. Wm. Roscher who seldom loses an occasion of registering, in black and white, ingenious apologetic fancies, records the following specimen: — "J. Seventh Report, 1865," pp. At length, in 1850, the privilege granted in 1844, was limited to the depart- ments of silk-twisting and silk-winding. .... They do increase or diminish by the same quantity. Obstetricians who have passed parts of the night in such cabins have described how they found their feet sinking in the mud of the floor, and they were forced (easy task) to drill a hole through the wall to effect a little private respiration. M. carts, ploughs, spades, and so forth, without a given portion of the first, are nothing at all." (Edmund Burke: "Thoughts and Details on Scarcity, originally presented to the Right Hon. von Maurer, "Ein- leitung zur Geschichte der Mark—, &c. En 6te, il travaille comme un forcat au labourage et a la r£colte; il se couche a 9 heures et se leve a deux, pour suffire aux travaux; en hiver il devrait Sparer ses forces par un plus grand repos; mais il manqu- era de grains pour le pain et les semailles, s'il se dSfait des denrees qu'il faudrait vendre pour payer les impots. These modes therefore imply the possibility, and no more than the possi- bility, of crises. In the same way the exchange-values of commodities must be capable of being expressed in terms of something common to them all, of which thing they represent a greater or less quantity. But Ireland is at present only an agricultural district of England, 1 The total yearly income under Schedule D. 6, and the detailed expla- nation of the "shifting system," by Factory Inspectors Howell and Saunders, in "Reports, &c, for 31st October, 1848." See also the petition to the Queen from the clergy of Ashton and vicinity, in the spring of 1849, against the "shift system." 2 Cf. for example, "The Factory Question and the Ten Hours Bill." By R. Their number grew 1 1 constantly, far beyond 100,000 They paid rents varying from -jx to-=- of the product in money or in kind. The misery of the agricultural population forms the pedestal for gigantic shirt-factories, whose armies of labourers are, for the most part, scattered over the country. Surplus-value / s\_ Surplus-value Surplus-labour Variable Capital \ v/~ Value of labour-power - Necessary labour The two first of these formulae represent, as a ratio of values, that which, in the third, is represented as a ratio of the times during which those values are produced. It may therefore be imagined that all commodities can simultaneously have this character impressed upon them, just as it can be imagined that all Catholics can be popes together. Did I not supply him with the mate- rials, by means of which, and in which alone, his labour could be embodied? THE LABOUR-PROCESS I9f of the product, or, what amounts to the same thing, upon the fac- tors of the labour-process; ten shillings were paid for the cotton, two shillings for the substance of the spindle worn away, and three- shillings for the labour-power. 2 "Reports from the Poor Law Inspectors on the Wages of Agricultural Labourers in Dublin," 1870. The time necessary for their sale is superadded to that necessary for their production. 384 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION the cotton fibre; it was only by means of this invention, that the production of cotton became possible on the enormous scale at present required. Go-operation ever constitutes the fundamental form of the capitalist mode of production; nevertheless the elementary form of co-operation continues to subsist as a particular form of capi- talist production side by side with the more developed forms of that mode of production. c, p. This was laughed at as a commu- nistic Utopia; so were his "Combination of children's education with pro- ductive labour" and the Co-operative Societies of working-men, first called into being by him. The comple- tion of the task within the proper time depends on the simultane- ous application of numerous combined working-days; the amount of useful effect depends on the number of labourers; this number, however, is always smaller than the number of isolated labourers required to do the same amount of work in the same period. In their present form (1866) the States must still be considered a European colony. On the other hand, in M— G— M, the reflux of the money is conditioned by the very mode of its expenditure. 17, 18. 2 What flows back to the labourer in the shape of wages is a portion of the product that is continuously reproduced 1 "Mais ces riches, qui consomment les produits du travail des aut- res, ne peuvent les obtenir que par des echanges [purchases of commodities]. But more characteristic than all this, was the revolu- tion that took place in the process of production at the expense of the workpeople. On this supposition then, the quantity of the medium of cir- MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OF COMMODITIES H9 culation is determined by the sum of the prices that have to be realised. This premised, with the rate, the mass is at the same time given of the surplus-value that the individual labourer furnishes to the capitalist in a definite period of time. Malting: 1851, 10,566: 1861, 10,677. . E. At each mouth of the furnace, there works a group, called "the hole," consisting of one bottlemaker or finisher, one blower, one gatherer, one put- ter-up or whetter-off, and one taker-in. "Mankind having consented to put an imaginary value upon gold and silver ... Use-values must therefore never be looked upon as the real aim of the capitalist; 2 neither must the profit on any single transac- tion. Wherever free labour is the rule, the laws regulate the mode of terminating this contract. This is merely an appli- cation of a mathematical rule, employed whenever we operate with constant and variable magnitudes, related to each other by the symbols of addition and subtraction only. (Imperial privileges and sanc- tions for Silesia, I., 25.) For a whole century in the decrees of the small German potentates a bitter cry goes up again and again about the wicked and imper- tinent rabble that will not reconcile itself to its hard lot, will not be content with the legal wage; the individual landed proprietors are forbidden to pay more than the State had fixed by a tariff. Neither have the sub-inspectors or myself any means of satisfying ourselves, when we inspect a mill working by shifts, that the young persons and women are not working more than 10 hours a-day. Y One does not per- ceive, when looking at the large manufactories and the large farms, that they have originated from the throwing into one of many small centres uf production, and have been built up by the expropriation of many small independent producers. 1862, p. First, as cheapening commodities, and thereby bringing about a fall in the value of labour-power. The consumption of food by a beast of burden is none the less a necessary factor in the process of production, because the beast enjoys what it eats. A larger part of their own surplus- product, always increasing and continually transformed into additional capital, comes back to them in the shape of means of payment, so that they can extend the circle of their enjoyments; can make some additions to their consumption-fund of clothes, furniture, &c, and can lay by small reserve-funds of money. The irruption of Marx into Society, as I may call his book, must be warded off... 143,966,106 lbs. lyd., from 20th April to 29th June, 1844, with day of eleven hours, average weekly wages 10s. 140-141. Here his apologetic armour crumbles off, bit by bit, like rotten touchwood. The result of all experience and history with regard to this question is simply that, where two commodities perform by law the functions of a measure of value, in practice one alone maintains that position." (Karl Marx, 1. This time the pretext was "the delicate texture of the fabric in which they were employed, requiring a lightness of touch, only to be acquired by their early introduction to these .factories." 4 The children were slaughtered out-and-out for the sake of their delicate fingers, as in Southern Russia the horned cattle for the sake of their hide and tallow. l In the London Economist of the 15th April, 1848, the same cry was again raised by James Wilson, an economic mandarin of high standing: this time in opposition to the 10 hours' bill. Vanderlint, who fancies that the prices of commodities in a country are determined by the quantity of gold and silver to be found in it, asks himself why Indian com- modities are so cheap. 133-134.) 3 "La privation que s'impose le capitaliste, en pretant (this euphemism used, for the purpose of identifying, according to the approved method of vulgar economy, the labourer who is exploited, with the industrial capi- talist who exploits, and to whom other capitalists lend money) ses instru- ments de production au travailleur, au lieu d'en consacrer la valeur a son pro- pre usage, en la transforment en objets d'utilite ou d'agrement." (G. without any comment this will go far to explain many of the complaints of stinting the action, superior skill, and working-power, made by the employers against the men" (in Trades-Unions. 2 1. In one scutching mill, at Kildinan, near Cork, there occurred between 1852 and 1856, six fatal accidents and sixty mutilations; every one of which might have been pre- vented by the simplest appliances, at the cost of a few shillings. Empl. But for the very reason that personal dependence forms the ground-work of society, there is no necessity for labour and its products to assume a fantastic form different from their reality. Thus, when the industrial cycle is in the phase of crisis, a general fall in the price of commod- ities is expressed as a rise in the value of money, and, in the phase of prosperity, a general rise in the price of commodities, as a fall in the value of money. The master tries, therefore, to run up, within the smallest space possible at the mouth of the pit, just so many cottages as are necessary to pack together his hands and their families. Thus it became possible to produce the forms of the individual parts of machinery "with a degree of ease, accuracy, and speed, that no accumulated experience of the hand of the most skilled workman could give." 1 If we now fix our attention on that portion of the machinery employed in the construction of machines, which constitutes the operating tool, we find the manual implements re-appearing, but on a cyclopean scale. The whole mystery of commodities, all the magic and necromancy that surrounds the products of labour as long as they take the form of commodities, vanishes therefore, so soon as we come to other forms of production. Take the working-day at 12 hours and the value created by it at 6 shillings, of which one half re- places the value of the labour-power, the other forms the surplus- value. c. The second additional capital of £400 pre-supposes, on the contrary, only the previous accumulation of the £2,000, of which the £400 is the sur- plus-value capitalised. Apart from the degree of development, greater or less, in the form of social production, the productiveness of labour is fettered by physical conditions. In piece-wages it seems at first sight as if the use-value bought from the labourer was, not the function of his labour-power, living labour, but labour already realised in the product, and as if the price of this labour was determined, not as with time-wages, by ,, f ,. Finally, the act of Parliament of June 29, 1871, made a pretence of removing the last traces of this class of legislation by legal recognition of Trades' Unions. 6, 7. This happened in Rome in its early days, where gold and silver coins circulated at first as foreign commodities. 6d.; other work is now priced at 2s. This revolution hangs together with radical changes in agriculture which we need not here further inquire into. And whilst centralisation thus intensifies and accelerates the effects of accumulation, it simultaneously extends and speeds those revolutions in the technical composition of capital which raise its constant portion at the expense of its variable portion, thus diminishing the relative demand for labour. Seventh Report. iv., p. The young people stolen, were thrown into the secret dungeons of Celebes, until they were ready for sending to the slave-ships. Whenever there is a general and extensive dis- turbance of this mechanism, no matter what its cause, money becomes suddenly and immediately transformed, from its merely ideal shape of money of account, into hard cash. At one time money must be attracted in order to act as circulating coin, at another, circulating coin must be repelled in order to act again as more or less stagnant money. The labourer employs more than one half of his working-day in producing the surplus-value, which different persons, under different pretexts, share amongst themselves. Coalition of the labourers is treated as a heinous crime from the 14th century to 1825, the year of the repeal of the laws against Trades' Unions. And his money he cannot eat. 212 CHAPTER IX THE RATE OF SURPLUS-VALUE SECTION 1.— THE DEGREE OF EXPLOITATION OF LABOUR-POWER The surplus-value generated in the process of production by G, the capital advanced, or in other words, the self-expansion of the value of the capital C, presents itself for our consideration, in the first place, as a surplus, as the amount by which the value of the product exceeds the value of its constituent elements. In reality, the labourer belongs to capital before he has sold himself to capital. The equation, 20 yards of linen =1 coat, or 20 yards of linen are worth one coat, implies that the same quantity of value-sub- stance (congealed labour) is embodied in both; that the two com- modities have each cost the same amount of labour of the same quantity of labour-time. Independently of this, a radical change takes place in the composition of the collective labourer, a change of the persons working in combination. E.) 56 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION contrary, the commodity coat now figures only as a definite quantity of some article. On the one hand, it must, as a definite useful kind of labour, satisfy a definite social want, and thus hold its place as part and parcel of the collective labour of all, as a branch of a social division of labour that has sprung up spontaneously. c, p. In those great manufactures, (!) on the contrary, which are destined to supply the great wants of the great body of the people, every different branch of the work employs so great a number of work- men, that it is impossible to collect them all into the same workhouse... We have, therefore, now to consider exchange from a formal point of view; to investigate the change of form or metamorphosis of commodities which effectuates the social cir- culation of matter. Superin- tendence is here completely dispensed with." (Cairnes, 1. If both be given, we have only to perform the conclud- ing operation, viz., to calculate — , the ratio of the surplus-value to the variable capital. 1 Although, therefore, the English land, after the Norman conquest, was distributed in gigantic baronies, one of which often included some 900 of the old Anglo-Saxon lordships, it was bestrewn with small peasant properties, only here and there interspersed with great seignorial domains. And yet, they both gain, or ought to gain. This does not re-establish private prop- erty for the producer, but gives him individual property based on the acquisitions of the capitalist era: i.e., on co-operation and the possession in common of the land and of the means of pro- duction, 764 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION The transformation of scattered private property, arising from individual labour, into capitalist private property is, nat- urally, a process, incomparably more protracted, violent, and difficult, than the transformation of capitalistic private prop- erty, already practically resting on socialised production, into socialised property. 400 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION ductive" employment of children under 14 years, in every in* dustry subject to the Factory Acts. The final report of the Ch. Empl. But now the capitalist buys children and young persons under age. xxi, pp. As co-operators, as members of a working organism, they are but special modes of existence of capital. For this, it is necessary that the labour expended upon it, be of a kind that is socially use- ful, of a kind that constitutes a branch of the social division of labour. * We must, therefore, in considering time-wages, again distinguish between the sum total of the daily or weekly wages, &c, and the price of labour. J. The absolute limit of the average working-day — this being by nature always less than 24 hours— sets an absolute limit to the compensation of a reduction of variable capital by a higher rate of surplus-value, or of the decrease of the number of labourers exploited by a higher degree of exploitation of labour- power. The chief objection, repeatedly and passionately urged on behalf of each manufacture threatened with the Factory Act, is in fact this, that in order to continue the business on the old scale a greater outlay of capital will be necessary. Were these two objects not qualitatively different, not produced respectively by labour of different quality, they could not stand to each other in the relation of commodities. If they find it, and thus renew the bond between them and the means of subsistence, this takes place only by the intermediary of a new and additional capital that is seeking investment; not at all by the intermediary of the capital that formerly employed them and was afterwards converted into machinery. . In order that his labour may re -appear in a commodity, he must, before all things, expend it on something useful, on something capable of satisfying a want of some sort. 1 have stated in "Zur Kritik, &c," p. The value in circulation has not increased by one iota, it is only distributed differently between A and B. And those who have denounced the over-crowded state of our rural population have not been silent as to a further mischief. His sur- o plus-labour is, therefore, increased by 2-r- hours, and the surplus- value he produces grows from one, into three shillings. The General form of \a!ue 1 coat 10 lbs. That money, however, is in some one else's pocket. It is clear that, whether a man buys his house ready built, or gets it built for him, in neither case will the mode of acquisition increase the amount of money laid out on the house. Pol., 1663), referring to the introduction of this machine into Leyden, "ante hos viginti circiter annos instrumentum quidam invenerunt textorium, quo solus plus panni et facilius conficere poterat, quan plures aequali tempore. 72. The laws of this centralisation of capitals, or of the attrac- tion of capital by capital, cannot be developed here. The master's machinery real- ly plays a far more important part in the business of produc- tion than the labour and the skill of the operative, which six months' education can teach, and a common labourer can learn." 2 The technical subordination of the workman to the uniform motion of the instruments of labour, and the peculiar composition of the body of workpeople, consisting as it does of individuals of both sexes and of all ages, give rise to a barrack discipline, which 1 F. In the first phase, M — G, or the purchase, the money is changed into a com- modity. Meanwhile, the advance of capitalistic production in Europe, accompanied by increasing Government pressure, has rendered Wakefield's recipe superfluous. It consists, like the other, of two antithetical phases. of Fact.," 31st Oct., 1855, p. Rep.," p. . "Of machinery, perhaps self-acting mules are as dangerous as any other kind. Lecture III., p. 130, n. And Bentham, because each looks only to himself. "The operatives have been greatly disap- pointed... 8 Later, it became a temporary necessity in the international competi- tive struggle. The product of this process belongs, therefore, to him, just as much as does the wine which is the product of a process of fermentation completed in his cellar. If it destroys these in one form, in particular branches, at certain points, it calls them up again elsewhere, because it needs them for the prep- aration of raw material up to a certain point. Thus the law of supply and demand of labour is kept in the right rut, the oscillation of wages is penned within limits satisfactory to capitalist exploitation, and lastly, the social dependence of the labourer on the capitalist, that indispensable requisite, is secured; an unmistakable relation of dependence, which the smug polit- ical economist, at home, in the mother-country, can transmogrify into one of free contract between buyer and seller, between equally independent owners of commodities, the owner of the commodity capital and the owner of the commodity labour. 1 Therefore,* however much the capitalist mode of appropria- tion may seem to fly in the face of the original laws of commodity production, it nevertheless arises, not from a violation, but, on the contrary, from the application of these laws. The money in tKis case is money of account and serves to express the value of the com- modities by their prices, but is not, itself, in the shape of hard cash, confronted with them. Silver and copper tokens take the place of gold in those regions of the circulation where coins pass from hand to hand most rapid- ly, and are subject to the maximum amount of wear and tear. THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALISTIC ACCUMULATION The relative surplus-population exists in every possible form. The division of this product into revenue and additional capital remaining the same, the con- sumption of the capitalist may, therefore, increase without any decrease in the fund of accumulation. If this diminution be not compensated by an increase from some other quarter, the market price of the commodi- ties falls. 2 Commodities, therefore, in which equal quantities of labour are embodied, or which can be produced in the same time, have the same value. 142.) "The share of the product which comes to the labourer in the form of wages." (J. This work also remarks: "Simple and outwardly unimportant as this appendage to lathes may appear, it is not, we believe, averring too much to state, that its influ- ence in improving and extending the use of machinery has been as great as that produced by Watt's improvements of the steam-engine itself. The legally guaranteed property of the poorer folk in a part of the church's tithes was tacitly confiscated. Comb-making: 1851, 2,038: 1861, 1,478. 1 The Tory* Cabinet announced in the Speech from the Throne, on February 5, 1867, that it had framed the proposals of the In- dustrial Commission of Inquiry 2 into Bills. — TheBethnal Green silk industry is now almost destroyed — F E.\ 2 "Children's Employment Commission, Third Report," London, 1864, p. Nev- ertheless, this minimum deviates from the average, although on the other hand the capitalist has to pay the average value of labour- power. In recent times the shepherd also has often been banished from these show-villages; e.g., near Market Harboro 'is a sheep-farm of about 500 acres, which only employs the labour of one man. Nathaniel Forster. He was, there- fore, in 1845, a favourite subject in the revelations of the Morn- ing Chronicle on the condition of the agricultural labourers. Its production consequently pre-supposes his existence. 1861," pp. They developed gradually out of circum- stances as natural laws of the modern mode of production. (6.) Herefordshire This little county has suffered more from the "eviction- spirit" than any other in England. The coat officiates as equivalent, or appears in equivalent form. 458 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION amount of size, both animal and vegetable, is used. . The same labourer is punished for breach of contract if he remains away from his metal, paper, or glass works on the Sunday, even if it be from a religious whim. 2 [Note added in the 3rd German edition.— The author resorts here to the economic language in current use. 1767,' p. The series itself, too, is now given, and has social recognition in the prices of actual commodities. 56. . Now it is quite possible to imagine, with Adam Smith, that the difference between the above social division of labour, and the division in manufacture, is merely subjective, exists merely for the observer, who, in a manufacture, can see with one glance, all the numerous operations being performed on one spot, while in the instance giv- en above, the spreading out of the work over great areas, and the great number of people employed in each branch of labour, obscure the connexion. First, the cotton and spindle must concur in the production of a use-value; they must in the present case become yarn. "We work on with no stoppage for meals, so that the day's work of IOV2 hours is finished by 4.30 p. Besides the rivalry that this struggle begets in the application of improved machinery for replacing labour- power, and of new methods of production, there also comes a time in every industrial cycle, when a forcible reduction of wages be- neath the value of labour-power, is attempted for the purpose of cheapening commodities. These were to some extent inflicted as a penalty for defects in the finished article that were really due to his bad cotton and to his unsuitable machinery. Means of production which already belong to the latter are then transformed by him, with the aid of labour equally belonging to him, into a new product which is likewise lawfully his. Messrs. The continuous rise in the price of corn, wool, meat, in a word of all agricultural produce, swelled the money capital of the farmer without any action on his part, whilst the rent he paid (being calculated on the old value of money) diminished in reality. d. Evidence of the "full-priced" baker Cheeseman, p. In the regular factories in which throughout piece-wages predominate, particular kinds of work are unsuitable to this form 1 "The system ot piece-work illustrates an epoch in the history of the working-man; it is halfway between the position of the mere day-labourer depending upon the will of the capitalist and the co-operative artisan, who in the not distant future promises to combine the artisan and the capitalist in his own person. . The simplicity of the organisation for production in these self-sufficing communities that constantly reproduce themselves in the same form, and when accidentally destroyed, spring up again on the spot and with the same name 2 — this simplicity supplies the key to the secret of the unchangeableness of Asiatic societies, an un- changeableness in such striking contrast with the constant dissolu- tion and refounding of Asiatic States, and the never-ceasing changes of dynasty. "Legal constraint (to labour) is attended with too much trouble, violence, and noise, .... lid. Dunton is not worse than the rest of Biggleswade Union. One of these rooms, in which 8 people slept, was 12 feet 10 inches long, 12 feet 2 inches broad, 6 feet 9 inches high: the average, without making any deduction for projections into the apartment, gave about 130 cubic feet per head. . His position is similar to that of the old Roman villicus, only in a more limited sphere of action. 3 And had we not the testimony of contemporary writers, the sim- ple facts, that during the period between the 16th century and the epoch of Modern Industry, capital failed to become the master of their State are so admirable that the most celebrated philosophers who treat of this subject praise the constitution of the Egyptian State above all others. . The practical difficulties in the way of coining extremely minute quantities of gold or silver, and the circumstance that at first the less precious metal is used as a measure of value instead of the more precious, copper instead of silver, silver instead of gold, and that the less precious circulates as money until dethroned by the more precious— all these facts explain the parts historically played by silver and copper tokens as substitutes for gold coins. c, p. Taking all these points into consideration, we have come to the conviction that some legislative enactment is wanted." ("Children's Employment Comm." Rep. . C, 27th April, 1863.) SIMPLE REPRODUCTION 575 emigration, he has a right to be heard, and perhaps to protest." Mr. Potter then shows how useful the cotton trade is, how the "trade has undoubtedly drawn the surplus-population from Ireland and from the agricultural districts," how immense is its extent, how in the year 1860 it yielded -r^ ths of the total English exports, how, after a few years, it will again expand by the extension of the mar- ket, particularly of the Indian market, and by calling forth a plen- tiful supply of cotton at 6d. In France, as in Eng- land, the great feudal tt«rritories were divided Into innumerable small home- steads, but under conditions incomparably more unfavourable for the peo- ple. This change in the technical composition of capital, this growth in the mass of means of production, as compared with the mass of the labour-power that vivifies them, is reflected again in its value-composition, by the increase of the constant consti- tuent of capital at the expense of its variable constituent. In order to act as such a mirror of value, the labour of tailoring must reflect nothing besides its own abstract quality of being human labour generally. But, by the very act of adding new value, he preserves their former values. The word pound, as a money-name, thus becomes differen- tiated from the same word as a weight-name. Doctor: Marry, all such as have takings of fearmes in their owne manurance [cultivation] at the old rent, for where they pay after the olde rate they sell after the newe — that is, they paye for theire lande good cheape, and sell all things growing thereof deare. child or young person." Clause 7, which imposes a penalty for employment of chil- dren, young persons, and women, contrary to the provisions of the Act, subjects to fines, not only the occupier of the workshop, whether parent or not, but even "the parent of, or the person deriving any direct benefit from the labour of, or having the con- trol over, the child, young person or woman." The Factory Acts Extension Act, which affects the large establishments, derogates from the Factory Act by a crowd of vicious exceptions and cowardly compromises with the masters. One year'previously, in his "Outlines of Political Economy," written for the in- struction of Oxford students and cultivated Philistines, he had also "dis- covered, in opposition to Ricardo's determination of value by labour, that 230 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION SECTION 4.— SURPLUS-PRODUCE The portion of the product that represents the surplus-value, (one-tenth of the 20 lbs., or 2 lbs. As long as the labour spent on a machine, and consequently the portion of its value added to the product, remains smaller than the value added by the workman to the product with his tool, there is always a difference of labour saved in favour of the machine. c, P . Hist. 242. Wakefield to have dis- covered, not anything new about the Colonies, l but to have dis- covered in the Colonies the truth as to the conditions of capitalist production in the mother-country. In like manner the partial product of the next 2 period of 1 hour and 36 minutes, is 2 -5- lbs. In this way, the character that his own labour possesses of being socially useful takes the form of the condition, that the product must be not only useful, but useful for others, and the social character that his particular labour has of being the equal of all other particular 74 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION kinds of labour, takes the form that all the physically different articles that are the products of labour, have one common quality, viz., that of having value. The normal price of labour is in the first case calculated on the labourer working 15 hours, in the second case on his working 6 hours a day on the average. I cannot say what this would be, but probably it would not be enough to enable the manufacturers to raise the price of steel, and con- sequently it would fall on them, as of course the men (what queer-headed folk!) would refuse to pay it." Mr. Sanderson does not know how much he pays the children, but "perhaps the young- er boys get from 4s. 4 "Capital is said by a Quarterly Reviewer to fly turbulence and strife, and to be timid, which is very true; but this is very incompletely stating the question. To-day industrial supremacy implies commercial supremacy. 564 PART VII THE ACCUMULATION OF CAPITAL The conversion of a sum of money into means of production and labour-power, is the first step taken by the quantum of value that is going to function as capital. 3 Hence both product and producer are improved by division of labour. The proposers of this plan conceive that there will be found in the adjoining counties, persons, who, being un- willing to labour and not possessing substance or credit to take a farm or ship, so as to live without labour, may be induced to make a very advantageous offer to the parish. 636 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION the technical revolution of the process of production that accom- panies, and is accelerated by, the advance of accumulation; and more rapidly than the corresponding diminution of the variable part of capital as compared with the constant. His aim is augmentation of his capi- tal, production of commodities containing more labour than he pays for, containing therefore a portion of value that costs him nothing, and that is nevertheless realised when the commodities are sold. The above economic fiction confuses the laws that regulate the general movement of wages, or the ratio between the working- class — i.e., the total labour-power — and the total social capi- tal, with the laws that distribute the working population over the different spheres of production. to 3s. "The usual terms are Is. 8d. 2 Herr Wilhelm Thucydides Roscher has found a mare's nest. 162 yds. Thus the powerful men drew all wealth to them- selves, and all the land swarmed with slaves. . . The Bank of England began with lending its money to the Government at 8%; at the same time it was empowered by Parliament to coin money out of the same capital, by lending it again to the public in the form of bank- notes. the ventilation is so bad in general that the men can scarcely breathe; they are quite unfit for employment of any kind MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 501 after they have been for a length of time in connexion with their work; indeed, just at the part of the mine where I am working, men have been obliged to leave their employment and come home in consequence of that . 3 Gladstone in the House of Commons, Feb 13th, 1843. Here the movement of profit, rent of land, &c, that come 1 Sismondi, 1. GENESIS OP THE INDUSTRIAL CAPITALIST 751 wealth of the country is a complete change in the right of property, and by what law, or series of laws, was it effected?" 1 The author should have remembered that revolutions are not made by laws. Periodical epidemics speak on this point as clearly as the diminishing mil- itary standard in Germany and France. However, we are not concerned here with the condition of the colonies. Although they formed one-third of the total number of manufacturers, yet their mills absorbed a much smaller part of the capital invested in the cotton trade. 650-654, 701.) "Do you think that those widows could get employment anywhere else, which would bring them in as much wages as that (from 8s. . Bekker. Here, we encounter again the system described above of domestic industry, which in under- payment and over-work, possesses its own systematic means for creating supernumerary labourers. In the second form, on the contrary, we perceive at once the background that determines, and is essentially different from, this accidental appearance. The folly is now patent of the economic wisdom that preaches to the labourers the accommodation of their number to the requirements of capital. In Wiltshire, e.g., the weekly wages rose from 7s. It is brought about by labour; but how? But this is not evident on the surface. The number of males employed in England and Wales, in hat-making, shoemaking, glove-making and tailoring was 437,969; of these 14,964 under 15 years, 89,285 between 15 and 20, and 333,117 over 20 years. Before the change, the total sum of £6,000 consisted half of constant, and half of variable capital. 126, p. The getting with child of girls of 13 and 44 by their male companions of the same age, is common. NUMBER OF FACTORIES. c, p. Afterwards, in the last book which treats of the sources of public revenue, he occasionally repeats the denunciations of the division of labour made by his teacher, A. 136 sq. The religious world is but the reflex of the real world. 13.) 2 "That letter might be looked upon as the manifesto of the manufac- turers." (Ferrand: "Motion on the Cotton Famine," H. Wherever they set foot, devastation and depopulation followed. 2 Reports, &c, for 30th April, 1848, p. to enforce the same dinner hour for all the workpeople might occasionally subject valuable goods to the risk of danger by incomplete operations." Le platonisme ou va-t-il se nicher! 1 Xenophon says, it is not only an honour to receive food from the table of the King of Persia, but such food is much more tasty than other food. Instead of the six hours that are sufficient for the latter purpose, the process may continue for twelve hours. Mr. R. But, on the other hand, these new freedmen became sellers of themselves only after they had been robbed of all their own means of production, and of all the guarantees of existence afforded by the old feudal arrangements. The more the productiveness of labour increases, the more can the working-day be shortened; and the more the working-day is shortened, the more can the intensity of labour increase. That in their appearance things often repre- sent themselves in inverted form is pretty well known in every science except Political Economy. The fact that the corn and the clothes are equivalents, does not deprive the process of all meaning, as it 1 "On n'echange pas de I'argent contre de l'argent," says Mercier dc la Riviere to the Mercantilists (1. 150 sq.). which was made of 5-t- lbs. 21.) This workshop, the product of the division of labour in manufac- ture, produced in its turn — machines. 2 As general rule, labourers cannot co-operate without being brought together: their assemblage in one place is a necessary condition of their co-operation. 5 It is the work of a man ... c, p. The new nobility was the child of its time, for which money was the power of all powers. Owing to these relations with the markets of the world, the demand for labour increases in the carrying trades, which split up into numerous varieties. 1 b. c, p. in Scotland, where education is better, this prejudice is, probably, unknown." (Charles H. is the sole end of trade." (J. These three factors, however, state of prices, quantity of circulating commodities, and velocity of money-currency, are all variable. Half the workers are children under thirteen, and young persons under eighteen. 29th Sept., 1849. He then proceeds to consume the commodity, the labour-power that he has just bought, by causing the labourer, the impersonation of that labour-power, to consume the means of production by his labour. The might of the feudal lord, like that of the sovereign, depended not on the length of his rent-roll, but on the number of his sub- jects, and the latter depended on the number of peasant pro- prietors. In the same way the means of communication and transport handed down from the manufacturing period soon became unbearable trammels on Modern Industry, with its feverish haste of production, its enormous extent, its constant flinging of capital and labour from one sphere of production into another, and its newly-created connexions with the markets of the whole world. is infinitely better adapted to women than to men. We will take the blacksmith as a type. To-day, the first Utopia is a Factory Act, the second figures as an official phrase in all Factory Acts, the third is already being used as a cloak for reactionary humbug. In pro- portion as industry advances, these natural limits recede. In London there are two sorts of bakers, the "full priced," who sell bread at its full value, and the "undersellers," who sell it under its value. Under these circumstances a compromise between masters and men was effected that received the seal of Parliament in the additional Factory Act of August 5th, 1850. If, then, the control of the 1 "Profits ... Only very few mills worked full time (60 hours a week), the remainder worked at intervals. That portion of the public, who, about 12 years ago, were struck by the assurance with which, under the sanction of high authority, it was publicly and most earnestly proclaimed, that the whole net profit of the manufacturer flows from the labour of the last hour, and that, therefore, the reduction of the working-day by one hour, would destroy his net profit, that portion of the public, we say, will hardly believe its own eyes, when it now finds, that the original discovery of the virtues of "the last hour" has since been so far im- proved, as to include morals as well as profit; so that, if the duration of the labour of children, is reduced to a full 10 hours, their morals, together with the net profits of their employers, will vanish, both being dependent on this last, this fatal hour. . If now circumstances allow of this price being raised to £3, or compel it to be reduced to £1, then although £1 and £3 may be too small or too great properly to express the magnitude of the wheat's value, neverthe- 1 "Owing to the fact that money, when serving as the standard oi price, appears under the same reckoning names as do the prices of commodities, and that therefore the sum of £3 17s. A does not trouble himself about my transaction with B, nor does B about my business with A. Living labour must seize upon these things and rouse them from their death-sleep, change them from mere possible use-values into real and effective ones. L'un rame pendant que l'autre tient le gouvernail, et qu'un troi- sieme jette le filet ou harponne le poisson, et la peche a un succes impossible sans ce concours." (Destutt de Tracy, 1. The relative quantity pro- duced, or the increase per cent of the variable capital, is deter- mined, it is plain, by the ratio of the surplus-value to the variable s 90 capital, or is expressed by — . 454-463. c, p. 3 Belgium is the model bourgeois state in regard to the regulation ot the working-day. SECTION 3.— THE TWO FUNDAMENTAL FORMS OF MANUFACTURE: HETEROGENEOUS MANUFACTURE, SERIAL MANUFACTURE The organisation of manufacture has two fundamental forms which, in spite of occasional blending, are essentially different in kind, and, moreover, play very distinct parts in the subsequent transformation of manufacture into modern industry carried on by machinery. Lond. Or the sedileship of the town may have pulled itself together for the removal of the most shocking abuses. This occurs where sales and purchases on a very small scale are continually happening. — F. I say "ul- timately," because average prices do not directly coincide with the values of commodities, as Adam Smith, Ricardo, and others believe. * Econ- omy of the social means of production, matured and forced as in a hothouse by the factory system, is turned, in the hands of cap- ital, into systematic robbery of what is necessary for the life of the workman while he is at work, robbery of space, light, air, and of protection to his person against the dangerous and unwhole- and painful times deducted lOd. a piece from some of the young workers employed by him, for the surgeon's certificate (for which he himself had only paid 6d.), when only allowed hy the law to deduct 3d., and by custom nothing at all . 48, note). o. Even the short sleep is obviously liable to be broken by a boy having to wake himself if it is night, or by the noise, if it is day." Mr. White gives cases where a boy worked 36 consecutive hours; others where boys of 12 drudged on until 2 in the morning, and then slept in the works till 5 a. 8.) The author of the "Essay on Trade and Commerce" grasps the effect of a relative surplus-population on the employed labourers with his usual unerring bourgeois instinct. . I will suppose a manufacturer to invest £100,000:— £80,000 in his mill and machinery, and £20,000 in raw material and wages. 250, § 190. But in the flood of production all the capital originally advanced becomes a van- ishing quantity (magnitude* evanescens, in the mathematical sense), compared with the directly accumulated capital, i.e., with the surplus-value or surplus-product that is reconverted into capital, whether it functions in the hands of its accumulator, or in thoso of others Hence, Political Economy describes capital in gen- eral as 'accumulated wealth" (converted surplus-value or reve* 1 We may well, therefore, feel astonished at the cleverness of Prou- dhon, who would abolish capitalistic property by enforcing the eternal laws of property that are based on commodity production! 588 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION nue), "that is employed over again in the production of sur- plus-value," 1 and the capitalist as "the owner of surplus-value." 2 It is merely another way of expressing the same thing to say that all existing capital is accumulated or capitalised interest, for interest is a mere fragment of surplus-value. It wants larger numbers of youthful labourers, a smaller number of adults. m. 3 It is a Parliamentary abor- tion. The great republic has, therefore, ceased to be the prom- ised land for emigrant labourers. 337,355 334,212 3,143 Turnips, . If, therefore, such expressions as "£90 variable capital," or "so much self-expanding value," appear contradictory, this is only be- cause they bring to the surface a contradiction immanent in capitalist production. The distribution of the work within the family, and the regulation of the labour-time of the several members, depend as well upon differences of age and sex as upon natural conditions varying with the seasons. 1861.— 1 in 8. The treas- ures captured outside Europe by undisguised looting, enslave- 1 In the year 1866 more than a million Hindus died of hunger in the province of Orissa alone. 21, 22. It is the fact that their respective products are commod- ities. Corbon, "De l'enseignement professional," 2eme ed., p. c. Later on, we saw also that labour, too, possesses the same two-fold nature; for, so far as it finds expression in value, it does not possess the same characteristics that belong to it as a creator of use-values. The reality of the value of commodities differs in this respect from Dame Quickly, that we don't know "where to have it." The value of commodities is the very opposite of the coarse mate- riality of their substance, not an atom of matter enters into its composition. But that process must have had a beginning of some kind. Since- its daily wear and tear, its coal-consumption, &c, are spread over the stupendous masses of iron hammered by it in a day, only a small value is added to a hundred weight of iron; but that value would be very great, if the cyclopean instrument were employed in driving in nails. he thinks that were more money in the country, he should have a price for his goods. . But all methods for the production of surplus-value are at the same time methods of accumulation; and every extension of accumulation becomes again a means for the development of those methods. c, p. It tries to rescue the law from collision with contradictory phenomena by a violent abstraction. I, pp. Our rent is 9d. of Fact., 31 Oct., 1865," p. 2 Robert Somers: "Letters from the Highlands: or the Famine of 1847." London, 1848, pp. (1) Either there is too much corn and cattel in the country, so that most who come to market have need of selling, as he hath, and few of buying; or (2) There wants the usual vent abroad by trans- portation...; or (3) The consumption fails, as when men, by reason of poverty, do not spend so much in their houses as formerly they did; wherefore it is not the increase of specific money, which would at all advance the farmer's goods, but the removal of any of these three causes, which do truly keep down the market ... 15.) MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 451 rial and in the disposal of the produce. Whether the motive pow- er is derived from man, or from some other machine, makes no difference in this respect. This practice has been often noticed in Reports presented to Parliament, as -being attended with great and notorious evils. may be substituted. In other countries it is found that tradesmen divide their attention between too many objects. xlv.) And this in the year of progress 1865! Without considering the expenditure of strength in lifting and carrying, such a child, in the sheds where bottle and flint glass are made, 264 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION SECTION 5.— THE STRUGGLE FOR A NORMAL WORKING-DAY. While in each individual workshop it enforces uni- formity, regularity, order, and economy, it increases by the im- mense spur which the limitation and regulation of the working- day give to technical improvement, the anarchy and the catas- trophes of capitalist production as a whole, the intensity of labour, and the competition of machinery with the labourer. 11 and 14.) 10 10 10 Mr. Broadhurst might just as well say: consider the tractions-^, -^, j-^r, &c, the number 10 remains unchanged, and yet its proportional magnitude, its magnitude relatively to the numbers 20. 50. o si o £&2 S a, S *s *h rt~ 5o5 §^s $J=3£ gpjg s. 50. Or, to take an example nearer home, in every factory the labour is divided according to a system, but this division is not brought about by the operatives mutually exchanging their individual products. He ex- changes it for the £2, and then, like a man of the good old stamp that he is, he parts with the £2 for a family Bible of the same price. On the other hand, whipping and imprisonment for sturdy vagabonds. 308.) EXPROPRIATION OF AGRICULTURAL POPULATION 721 a cottage on the manor of Front Mill without 4 acres of land at- tached to the same in perpetuity. This part is played by the iron only within this relation, into which the sugar or any other body, whose weight has to be COMMODITIES 57 determined, enters with the iron. As cottage accommodation could not be obtained for them all, huts were built in several places along the line of the works by the contractor, Mr. Jay, for their especial occupation. Strike for 8 months, and great misery at Preston; 1854 prosperity, glutted markets; 1855 news of failures stream in from the United States, Canada, and the Eastern markets; 1856 great prosperity; 1857 crisis; 1858 improvement; 1859 great prosperity, increase in factories; 1860 Zenith of the English cotton trade, the Indian, Australian, and other markets so glutted with goods that even in 1863 they had not absorbed the whole lot; the French Treaty of Commerce, enormous growth of factories and machinery; 1861 prosperity continues for a time, reaction, the American Civil War, cotton famine; 1862 to 1863 complete collapse. 417, Note.) 560 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION not reckon as labour of normal quality. Labour is the substance, and the immanent measure of value, but has itself no value. 3 In Asia, on the other hand, the fact that state taxes are chiefly composed of rents payable in kind, 1 As an example of how little ready money is required in true commer- cial operations, I give below a statement by one of the largest London houses of its yearly receipts and payments. The motive mechanism grows with the number of the machines that are turned simultaneously, and the transmitting mechanism becomes a wide-spreading apparatus. But in the first case the value of the machine would be repro- duced twice as quickly as in the latter, and the capitalist would, by this use of the machine, absorb in 1-^ years as much surplus- value as in the second case he would in 15. 2 "Child. a great number of the women have illegitimate children, and that at such an immature age that even those most conversant with criminal statistics are astounded." 1 And the native land of these model families is the pattern Christian country for Europe; so says at least Count Montalembert, cer- tainly a competent authority on Christianity! Wages in the above industries, miserable as they are (the maximum wages of a child in the straw-plait schools rising in rare cases to 3 shillings), are reduced far below their nominal amount by the prevalence of the truck system everywhere, but especially in the lace districts. This constant transformation of the wage-labourers into independent producers, who work for themselves instead of for capital, and enrich themselves instead of the capitalist gentry, reacts in its turn very perversely on the conditions of the 1. If, therefore, two different commodities, such as gold and silver, are simultaneously measures of value, all commodities have two prices — one a gold-price, the other a silver-price. "Wages," says John Stuart Mill, "have no productive power; they are the price of a productive power. From our present standpoint it therefore seems likely that the capitalist, once upon a time, became possessed of money, by some accumula- tion that took place independently of the unpaid labour of others, and that this was, therefore, how he was enabled to frequent the market as a buyer of labour-power. This [scheme approved by Eden] would give the people of property sufficient (but by no means too much) influence and authority over those who . If she fail, or do not try independently, she must join an establishment, where her labour is not less, but where her money is safe. When it is considered what luxuries the manufacturing populace consume, such as brandy, gin, tea, sugar, foreign fruit, strong beer, printed linens, snuff, tobacco, &c." 3 He quotes the work of a Northamptonshire manufacturer, who, with eyes squinting heavenward, moans: "Labour is one- third cheaper in France than in England; for their poor work hard, and fare hard, as to their food and clothing. 361, 364, 366, 368, 371, 375.) "One great object in summoning a jury is to have an impartial one, is it not?" "Yes, I should think so." "Do you think that the juries would be impartial if they were composed to a considerable extent of workmen?" "I cannot see any motive which the workmen would have to act partially . This is the dilemma incessantly presented to the labourers." According to this the budget of the family is: The father 300 working-days at fr. ii, pp. The mass of the surplus-value produced is therefore equal to the surplus-value which the working-day of one labourer supplies 304 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION multiplied by the number of labourers employed. To be perfectly happy, Ireland must get rid of at least one-third of a million of labouring men. Harrup sum- moned 19 women and girls before the magistrates for breach of contract. We are, therefore, forced to the conclusion that the change originates in the use-value, as such, of the commodity, i.e., in its consump- tion. For the rest, it requires but a slight acquaintance with the history of the Roman republic, for example, to be aware that its secret history is the history of its landed property. From being the mere means of effecting the circulation of commodities, this change of form becomes the end and aim. Herr Roscher translates it rightly by "Enthaltung." Some of his countrymen, the Browns, Jones, and Robinsons, of Germany, not so well versed in Latin as he, have, monk-like, rendered it by "Entsagung" (renunciation). In consequence of thus finding out that I am fit for any sort of work, 1 teel less oi amollusk and more of a man." (A. 5.) A careful comparison of this book with Hume's "Essays," proves to my mind without doubt that Hume was acquainted with and made use of Vanderlint's work, which is certainly an important one. But Professor Rogers comes to the conclusion that the lot of the English agricultural labourer of to-day, not to speak of his predecessor in the last half of the 14th and in the 15th centu- ry, but only compared with his predecessor from 1770 to 1780, has changed for the worse to an extraordinary extent, that "the peasant has again become a serf," and a serf worse fed and worse clothed. to 2d. An industrial army of workmen, under the command of a capitalist, requires, like a real army, officers (managers), and ser- geants (foremen, overlookers), who, while the work is being done, command in the name of the capitalist. In a given country there take place every day at the same time, but in different localities, numerous one-sided metamor- phoses of commodities, or, in other words, numerous sales and nu- merous purchases. For more on this point see my work "Zur Kritik der Pol. Suppose the circulation of the 4 articles takes a day. In the larger seignorial domains, the old bailiff, himself a serf, was displaced by the free farmer. If the limit of the working-day is given, and also the limit of its necessary constituent, the mass of value and surplus-value that an individual capitalist produces, is clearly exclusively dependent on the mass of labour that he sets in motion. Come what will, he has no share either in prosperity or adversity." 4 In the year 1863, an official inquiry took place into the con- ditions of nourishment and labour of the criminals condemned to transportation and penal servitude. When I have heard such inconsiderate remarks made, I have usually put this question: Suppose you were in want of an addi- tional workman, and two were to apply, both equally well qualified In other respects, but one had lost a thumb or a forefinger, which would you engage? J A The altered character of the form of value All commodities now express their value (1) in an elementary form, because in a single commodity; (2) with unity, because in one and the same commodity. The rate of profit is, as we have already said, the ratio of the surplus-value to the total capital advanced; the rate of surplus-value is the ratio of the surplus-value to the variable part of that capital. 21, 22 Cf like examples ibid. After the lapse of a certain num- ber of years, the capital value he then possesses is equal to the sum total of the surplus-value appropriated by him during those years, and the total value he has consumed is equal to that of his original capital. The varied, appar- ently unconnected, and petrified forms of the industrial proc- esses now resolved themselves into so many conscious and sys- tematic applications of natural science to the attainment of given useful effects. On his side the Professor has embodied the lec- ture he received from the Manchester manufacturers, in a pamphlet, entitled: "Letters on the Factory Act, as it affects the cotton manufacture." London, 1837. Lond., 1861 and 1866. 2 His wants are constantly making themselves felt, and necessitate the continual purchase of other people's commodities, while the production and sale of his own goods require time, and depend upon circumstances. c, p 88. Before he had time to get his tea, he was again called on for duty.... The quantity of the circulating medium will increase, provided the number of commodities increase quicker, or the rapidity of circulation decrease quicker, than the prices fall. The quantity of labour, however, is measured by its duration, and labour-time in its turn finds its standard in weeks, days, and hours. "When the savage," says Senior, "makes bows, he exercises an industry, but he does not practise abstinence." This explains how and why, in the earlier states of society, the implements of labour were fabricated without abstinence on the part of the capi- talist. 4 For children's labour, the Act of 1844 remained in force. In themselves money and commodities are no more capital than are the means of production and of subsistence. . It is therefore nothing unusual either for the landlord to raise a labourer's rent as soon as he hears that he is earning a little more, or for the farmer to lower the wage of the la- bourer, "because his wife has found a trade," 1. 53, seq. In this \ industry are to be found employed children of 2 and 2— years." 2 Where lace-making ends in the counties of Buckingham and Bedford, straw-plaiting begins, and extends over a large part of Hertfordshire and the westerly and northerly parts of Essex. 486). The workman's continued repetition of the same simple act, and the concentra- tion of his attention on it, teach him by experience how to attain the desired effect with the minimum of exertion. Eden, philanthropist and tory, to boot. The prolongation of the working-day beyond the limits of the natural day, into the night, only acts as a palliative. Is it not as salutary in surgery, as it is knowing in anatomy? It became real money, by the general alienation of commodities, by actually changing places with their natural forms as useful objects, and thus becoming in reality the embodi- ment of their values. * "The muslins of Dakka in fineness, the calicoes and other piece goods of Coroman- del in brilliant and durable colours, have never been surpassed. But the value of a commodity is determined, not only by the quan- tity of labour which the labourer directly bestows upon that com- modity, but also by the labour contained in the means of produc- tion. . 39.) 4 "The Printworks' Act is admitted to be a failure, both with reier- ence to its educational and protective provisions." (Reports, &c ., for 31st October, 1862, p 52.) CAPITALIST PRODUCTION of exploitation still "free." 1 The Pharisees of "Political Economy" now proclaimed the discernment of the necessity of a legally fixed working-day as a characteristic new discovery of their "sci- ence." 2 It will be easily understood that after the factory magnates had resigned themselves and become reconciled to the inevitable, the power of resistance of capital gradually weakened, whilst at the same time the power of attack of the working-class grew with the number of its allies in the classes of society not immediately interested in the question. It is owing to this fact, that the production of the new value of three shillings takes the semblance of a mere reproduction. c. 1 Such a crisis occurs only where the ever-lengthening chain of payments, and an artificial system of settling them, has been fully developed. Hence the notion of a productive labourer implies not merely a relation between work and useful effect, between labourer and product of labour, but also a specific, social relation of production, a relation that has sprung up historically and stamps the labourer as the direct means of creating surplus-value. . "Where land is very cheap and all men are free, where every one who so pleases can easily obtain a piece of land for himself, not only is labour very dear, as re- spects the labourer's share of the produce, but the difficulty is to obtain combined labour at any price." 4 As in the colonies the separation of the labourer from the conditions of labour and their root, the soil, does not yet exist, or only sporadically, or on too limited a scale, so neither does the separation of agriculture from industry exist, nor the de- struction of the household industry of the peasantry. Use-value is, by no means, the thing "qu'on aime pour lui-meme" in the production of commodities. 47, 246. If the bushel of wheat should cost 1 Postlethwayt, 1. lb.; the raw material therefore costs in round numbers £342. 183.) 2 "When a man is in want of a demand, does Mr. Malthus recommend him to pay some other person to take off his goods?" is a question put by an angry disciple of Ricardo to Malthus, who, like his disciple, Parson Chal- mers, economically glorifies this class of simple buyers or consumers. For the labour spent upon them counts effectively, only in so far as it is spent in a form that is useful for others. If he (i.e., his "hands") worked 12 hours before, and is limited to 10, then every 12 machines or spindles in his establishment shrink to 10, and should the works be disposed of, they will be valued only as 10, so that a sixth part would thus be deducted from the value of every factory in the country." 2 To this West of Scotland bourgeois brain, inheriting the accumulated capitalistic qualities of "four generations," the value of the means of production, spindles, &c, is so inseparably mixed up with their property, as capital, to expand their own value, and to swallow up daily a definite quantity of the unpaid labour of oth- ers, that the head of the firm of Carlile & Co. actually imagines that if he sells his factory, not only will the value of the spindles be paid to him, but, in addition, their power of annexing surplus- value, not only the labour which is embodied in them, and is nec- essary to the production of spindles of this kind, but also the sur- plus-labour which they help to pump out daily from the brave Scots of Paisley, and for that very reason he thinks that with the shortening of the working-day by 2 hours, the selling-price of 12 spinning machines dwindles to that of 10! 1 Reports of Tnsp. l Hence, as a necessary consequence, the modern doctrine that a nation becomes the richer the more deeply it is in debt. The reason why means of production do not lose their value, at the same time that they lose their use-value, is this: they lose in the labour-process the original form of their use-^ value, only to assume in the product the form of a new use-value. c, p. Ferrier, sous-inspecteur des douanes, "Du gouvernement considere dans ses rapports avec le commerce," Paris, 1805; and Charles Ganilh, "Des Systemes d'Economie Politique," 2nd ed., Paris, 1821. Its origin is supposed to be explained when it is told as an anecdote of the past. In an interview with the Home Secretary (1844), the factory inspectors demonstrated the impossibility of any control under the newly invented relay system. T. 48. . 6 by 4 ft. 2 Rents, taxes, and such like payments are transformed from payments in kind into money payments. The value of these additional means of production however, may rise, fall, remain unaltered, be large or small; it has no influence on the process of creation of surplus-value by means of the labour- powers that put them in motion. the percentage of bad ones may be a little more . A room where twenty weavers work at twenty looms must be larger than the room of a single weaver with two assistants. e., Sismondi), "De la Richesse Commerciale," Geneve, 1803, t. But he might also let the 100 labourers work 12 hours instead of 8, and then the instruments of labour already to hand would be enough. 1735.) "Still it is injurious to their morality, you think?" "Not so much as working on the pit bank; but it is more on the social position I take it; I do not take it on its moral ground alone. The variable capital, instead of being one half, is only one quarter, of the total capital. SECTION 3.— SENIOR'S "LAST HOUR" One fine morning, in the year 1836, Nassau W. But neither is the number of labourers required to render fluid this mass of labour-power given (it changes with the degree of exploitation of the individual labour-power), nor is the price of this labour-power given, but only its mini- mum limit, which is moreover very variable. 13-14, 20 and 1852, p. La celerite" de son mouvement (sc de l'argent) supplee a sa quantite. High rents, from £4 to £5; weekly wages of the man, 10s. I may also add that every question and its answer are numbered in the English Blue books. A large number of accidents are caused by the eagerness of the workpeople to get through their work expedi- tiously. In the year 1835 the 15,000 Gaels were already replaced by 131,000 sheep. These above all must disappear. The value of A, thus expressed in the use-value of B, has taken the form of relative value. . 2. c, p. For the labour that creates it, now stands expressly revealed, as labour that ranks equally with every other sort of human labour, no matter what its form, wheth- er tailoring, ploughing, mining, &c, and no matter, therefore, whether it is realised in coats, corn, iron, or gold. . . 54, 55.) 4 "Ch. Empl. a week. It calls to mind the boundless reproduc- tion of animals individually weak and constantly hunted down. In modern agriculture, as in the urban industries, the increased productive- ness and quantity of the labour set in motion are bought at the cost of laying waste and consuming by disease labour-power itself. They were "sacred banks." With the Phoenicians, a trading people par excellence, money was the transmuted shape of everything. 14-15.) Thus defeated by the very workpeople, in whose name it pretended to speak, Capital discovered, with the help of lawyer spectacles, that the Act of 1860, drawn up, like all the Acts of Parlia- ment for the "protection of labour," in equivocal phrases, gave them a pretext to exclude from its working the calenderers and finishers. Each of these families had less space than is considered necessary for a convict. 4 In the wholesale boot and shoe trade of Leicester alone, there were in 1864, 800 sewing-machines already in use. It has already been stated, that where the finished article consists merely of a number of parts fitted togeth- er, the detail operations may re-establish themselves as genuine and separate handicrafts. * In treating of Co-operation and Manufacture, it was shown that certain general factors of production, such as buildings, are, in comparison with the scattered means of production of the isolated workman, economised by being consumed in common, and that they therefore make the product cheaper. Here, the rise in the price of labour- power does not necessarily imply that the price has risen above the value of labour-power. 191. He has not the least suspicion that the most simple 1 Such expressions of relations in general, called by Hegel reflex-cate- sories, form a very curious class. He wishes, on the contrary, to increase their wants and to make the increasing number of their wants a stimulus to their labour for the "more delicate." ■ Storch, 1. If the number of the moves diminish, the total number of pieces increases. it seems quite incom- prehensible that man can have fallen under the domination of capital, his own product; can be subordinated to it; and as in reality this is beyond dis- pute the case, involuntarily the question arises; How has the labourer been able to pass from being master of capital— as its creator — to being its slave?" (Von Thunen, "Der tsolierte Staat " Part ii., Section ii., Rostock, 1863, pp. Consequently by the mere labour of spinning, a value of three shillings is added to the cotton. We there stated, p. The simple transforma- tion of money into the material factors of the process of produc- tion, into means of production, transforms the latter into a title and a right to the labour and surplus-labour of -others. The fewer the number of natural wants imperatively calling for satisfaction, and the greater the natural fertility of the soil and the favourableness of the climate, so much less is the labour- time necessary for the maintenance and reproduction of the producer. It is converted into a use-value before it has been converted into money. To say nothing of more recent times, have the agricultural population received a farthing of compen- sation for the 3,511,770 acres of common land which between 1801 and 1831 were stolen from them and by parliamentary de- vices presented to the landlords by the landlords? Only since 1853, in one single department — THE WORKING-DAY 279 They remained a dead Letter. Sewing thread . The second step to which it drives, is to exclude also from the selling price of the commodity, at least a part of the abnormal surplus-value created by the extension of the working- day. 2 F. Still, 8 George II. Instances of machines for the fabrication of these mechanical tools are, the automatic bobbin-making engine, the card-setting engine, shuttle-making machines, and machines for forging mule and throstle spindles, MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 375 by turning the crank of a mill, 1 by pumping, by moving up and down the arm of a bellows, by pounding with a mortar, &c, such implements soon call for the application of animals, water, 2 and wind as motive powers. All I fiat is solid melts into air, all that is holy is profaned, and man is at last com- MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 487 chemical processes and other methods, it is continually causing changes not only in the technical basis of production, but also in the functions of the labourer, and in the social combinations of the labour-process. Two and a half days' labour has been embodied in it, of which two days were contained in the cotton and in the substance of the spindle worn away, and half a day was absorbed during the process of spinning. MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 395 place, not only of the children's play, but also of free labour at home within moderate limits for the support of the family. All bounds of morals and nature, age and sex, day and night, were broken down. during the last half year in my district." (Re- ports, &c, for 31st October, 1857, p. . These deal especially with the branches of in- dustry in which the Factory Acts had not, up to 1862, been introduced, in fact are not yet introduced. liv. . 180, 182. c, p 88. ' 2 Dr. R. But if all his brother capitalists were to do the same, where would he find his commodities in the market? m. If one fine morning the lord appropriates to himself the land, the cattle, the seed, in a word, the means of production of this peasant, the latter will thenceforth be obliged to sell his labour-power to the lord. Wheels, rollers, spindles and shuttles are now pro- pelled at increased and increasing rates; fingers must be quicker and defter in their movements to take up the broken thread, for, if placed with hesitation or carelessness, they are sacrificed. And this is the point relied on by our apologists! The contradictions and antagonisms insep- arable from the capitalist employment of machinery, do not exist, they say, since they do not arise out of machinery, as such, but out of its capitalist employment! Since therefore machinery, con- sidered alone, shortens the hours of labour, but, when in the serv- ice of capital, lengthens them; since in itself it lightens labour, but when employed by capital, heightens the intensity of labour; since in itself it is a victory of man over the forces of Nature, but in the hands of capital, makes man the slave of those forces; since in itself it increases the wealth of the producers, but in the hands of capital, makes them paupers — for all these reasons and others besides, says the bourgeois economist without more ado, it is clear as noon-day that all these contradictions are a mere semblance of the reality, and that, as a matter of fact, they have neither an actual nor a theoretical existence. * Constant changes in the construction of the machines, and their ever-increasing cheapness, depreciate day by day the older makes, and allow of their being sold in great numbers, at absurd prices, to large capitalists, who alone can thus employ them at a profit. He had already dealt with this subject in his earlier work: "Considerations on Taxes." London, 1765. x The denser hour of the ten hours' working- day contains more labour, i.e., expended labour-power, than the more porous hour of the twelve hours' working-day. In these instances there is no con- sumption of value." (S. Military service, which hastened to so great an extent the ruin of the Roman plebeians, was also the chief means by which, as in a forcing-house, Charlemagne brought about the transformation of free German peasants into serfs and bondsmen. I pointed out, that while the workpeople are practically incapa- ble of doing themselves this sanitary justice, they are unable to obtain any effective support from the paid administrations of the sanitary police. Use-values cannot con- front each other as commodities, unless the useful labour em- bodied in them is qualitatively different in each of them. 405.) "A complete revo- lution" (1. In order to carry out more perfectly the division of labour in manufacture, a single branch of production is, according to the varieties of its raw material, or the various forms that one and the same raw material may assume, split up into numerous, and to some extent, entirely new manufactures. Of course the pretensions of capital in embryo— when, beginning to grow, it secures the right of absorbing a quantum sufficit of surplus-labour, not merely by the force of economic relations, but by the help of the State— appear very modest when put face to face with the concessions that, growling and struggling, it has to make in its adult condition. I., c. Though the method is so simple, yet it may not be amiss, by means of a few examples, to exercise the reader in the applica- tion of the novel principles underlying it. gave the impulse to these improvements. The economic discoverers of this chemical element, who by-the- by lay special claim to critical acumen, find however that the use-value of objects belongs to them independently of their mate- rial properties, while their value, on the other hand, forms a part of them as objects. On a comparison of the text of his compendium, "Principles of Pol. The boy is a mere substitute for steam power." ("Ch. Empl Comm. But the agricultural year in Wallachia num- bers in consequence of the severe climate only 210 days, of which 40 for Sundays and holidays, 30 on an average for bad weather, together 70 days, do not count. We are only asking what is right in requesting the masters generally to pursue a system of short hours, particularly until a better state of things begins to dawn upon us, rather than to work a por- tion of the hands over-time, while others, for want of work, are com- pelled to exist upon charity." ("Reports of Insp, of Fact., Oct. ra., so that we are really working over-time the whole year round." (Mr. Smith's "Evidence in Child. To the utter indignation of all present, they were each mulcted in a fine of 6d. Other days I began at 6 in the morning, and gi'en over at 6 or 7 in the evening," &c. The class which one year passes with full weight, loses enough by wear and tear to draw the scales next year against it." (House of Lords' Committee, 1848, n. 2 1. It alters only the proportion in which that surplus-value is divided between himself and third persons. 2 humain." (Boisguillebert: "Dissertation sur la nature des richesses, de I'ar- gent et des tributs." Edit. There the process is distin- guished by its systematic character, by the magnitude of the scale on which it is carried out at one blow (in Ireland landlords have gone to the length of sweeping away several villages at once; in Scotland areas as large as German principalities are dealt with), finally by the peculiar form of property, under which the embez- zled lands were held. has almost every where arrayed itself against labour ... This juridical relation, which thus expresses itself in a contract, whether such contract be part of a developed legal system or not, is a relation between two wills, and is but the reflex of the real economic relation between the two. 192.) 176 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION the sphere of circulation. We saw in a former chapter, that a certain minimum amount of capital was necessary, in order that the number of labourers simultaneously employed, and, consequently, the amount of surplus-value produced, might suffice to liberate the employer himself from manual labour, to convert him from a small master into a capitalist, and thus formally to establish capitalist produc- tion. In other respects, the Act only amended and completed the Acts of 1833 and 1844. Only of things destined to satisfy the wants and desires of the capitalist class, things which, consequently, enter into the consump- tion-fund of the capitalists? From the moment that the tool prop- er is taken from man, and fitted into a mechanism, a machine takes the place of a mere implement. 60. His means of consumption, "in that case, are the mere means of con- sumption required by a means of production; his individual con- sumption is directly productive consumption. Wade with truth remarks: "From tht statement above (i.e., with regard to the statute) it appears that in 1496 the diet was considered equivalent to one-third of the income of an arti- ficer and one-half the income of a labourer, which indicates a greater degree of independence among the working-classes than prevails at present; for the board, both of labourers and artificers, would now be reckoned at a much higher proportion of their wages." (J. . 22.) 551 CHAPTER XXI PIECE-WAGES Wages by the piece are nothing else than a converted form of wages by time, just as wages by time are a converted form of the value or price of labour-power. Mr. Baker was formerly a doctor. The consumption of labour-power is completed, as in the case of every other commodity, outside the limits of the market or of well aware of this adulteration, nevertheless accept the alum, stone-dust, &c, as part of their purchase: that it is for them "a matter of necessity to take from their baker or from the chandler's shop, such bread as they choose to supply." As they are not paid their wages before the end ot the week, they in their turn are unable "to pay for the bread consumed by their tami- lies during the week, before the end of the week," and Tremenheere adds on the evidence of witnesses, "it is notorious that bread composed of those mix- tures is made expressly for sale in this manner." In many English and still more Scotch agricultural districts, wages are paid fortnightly and even monthly; with such long intervals between the payments, the agri- cultural labourer is obliged to buy on credit... From 1838 to 1850, the average proportional increase in English cotton and other factories was 32%, while from 1850 to 1856 it amounted to 86%. This contrac- produire. and thus his profit will be raised. 2., p. 2 The history of the Factory Act of 1850 will be found in the course of this chapter. But when viewed in their qualitative aspect alone, £110 are the same as £100, namely money; and considered quan- titatively, £110 is, like £100, a sum of definite and limited value. 74.) 2 The phrase, "labouring poor," is found in English legislation from the moment when the class of wage-labourers becomes noticeable. 1 Its total emigration from May, 1851, to July, 1865, numbered 1,591,487: the emigra- tion during the years 1861-1865 was more than half-a-million. 2 I. One of the measures that we apply to commodities as material substances, as use-values, will serve to illustrate this point. Potter, New York, 1841, pp. The appear- ance of the two equivalents, commodities and money, at the t'svo poles of the process of sale, has ceased to be simultaneous. Both from the working-class itself, and from other ranks of society, there arose a cry for State aid, or for voluntary national subscriptions, in order to enable the "superfluous" hands to emi- grate to the colonies or to the United States. We here leave out of consideration the portion of the surplus- value consumed by the capitalist. Money that represents commodities long withdrawn from circulation, continues to be current. . In the economic domain, e.g., financiers, stock-exchange speculators, merchants, shopkeepers skim the cream; in civil matters, the lawyer fleeces his clients; in politics the representative is of more importance than the voters, the minis- ter than the sovereign; in religion God is pushed into the background by the "Mediator," and the latter again is shoved back by the priests, the inevitable middlemen between the good shepherd and his sheep. If the capitalist wishes to raise this sum by one half, he can employ 50 more workers; but then he must also advance more capital, not merely for wages, but for instruments of labour. In certain circumstances he becomes a slave. total annual profit. Prolongation of the Working-Day If machinery be the most powerful means for increasing the productiveness of labour — i. "As the old irregular system prevails in neighbouring works, the Messrs. If some masters were not so greedy, the boys would not work late; an extra machine costs only £\6 or £18; much of such over- time as does occur is to be referred to an insufficiency of appliances, and a want of space." "Ch. Empl. And the ideal this time fades before the reality. i ^Report of Tnsp. m. Not only were the conquered South German peasants again enslaved. The class of wage-labourers, which arose in the latter half of the 14th century formed then and in the following cen- tury only a very small part of the population, well protected in its position by the independent peasant proprietary in the country and the guild-organisation in the town. The industrial reserve army, during the periods of stagnation and average prosperity, weighs down the active labour-army; during the periods of over-production and paroxysm, it holds its pretensions in check. The German colonists in Brandenburg, Pomerania, Silesia, and Eastern Prussia, were even legally acknowledged as free men. Considerations of economy, more- over, which, under a natural system, afford some security for humane treatment by identifying the master's interest with the slave's preservation, when once trading in slaves is practised, become reasons for racking to the uttermost the toil of the slave; for, when his place can at once be supplied from foreign preserves, the duration of his life becomes a matter of less mo- ment than its productiveness while it lasts. 1 "An Inquiry into the Connexion between the Present Price of Provi- sions, &c," pp. . E or=&c. In these cases the constant capital consists almost exclusively of instruments of labour, which can very well absorb an increased quantity of labour (day and night shifts of labourers, e.g.). See Appen- dix No. 2; Reports, &c, 31st October, 1862, pp. It is true, he has in hand a capital whose amount has not changed, and of which a part, viz., the buildings, machinery, &c, were already there when the work of his business began. 13. iv. of cotton for £100, and resell the 2,000 lbs. . "Our capital," says one of the charac- ters in the melodrama, "was ready for many operations which require a considerable period of time for their completion; but we could not begin such operations with labour which, we knew, would soon leave us. Mr. Wollarton, the clergyman 484 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION has shown us in detail, the germ of the education of the future, an education that will, in the case of every child over a given age, combine productive labour with instruction and gymnastics, not only as one of the methods of adding to the efficiency of production, but as the only method of producing fully developed human beings. SIMULTANEOUS VARIATIONS IN THE DURATION, PRODUCTIVENESS, AND INTENSITY OF LABOUR It is obvious that a large number of combinations are here possible. Econ.," 2nd Ed., Lond., 1836, p. The subordinate part which he assigns to machinery gave occasion in the early days of modern mechanical industry to the polemic of Lauder- dale, and, at a later period, to that of Ure. Verfassung," Munchen, 1854, p. 531 CHAPTER XVIII VARIOUS FORMULA FOR THE RATE OF SURPLUS-VALUE We have seen that the rate of surplus-value is represented by the following formulae. 2 "Employers of labour would not unnecessarily retain two sets of children under thirteen.... Thus, the ex- panded form of relative value, or form B, now shows itself as the specific form of relative value for the equivalent commodity. That is not the way to get rich or to create surplus- value. It was natural to think that, in an exchange, value was given for value, whenever each of the articles exchanged was of equal value with the same quantity of gold. But where is the medal without its reverse! Any employment of machinery, acquired; he himself is a sort of machine. 3 two ... To devise and administer a successful code of factory discipline, suited to the necessities of factory diligence, was the Herculean enterprise, the noble achievement of Arkwright! Even at the present day, when the system is perfectly organised and its labour lightened to the utmost, it is found nearly impossible to convert persons past the age of puberty, into useful factory hands." 1 The factory code in which capital formulates, like a private legislator, and at his own good will, his autocracy over his workpeople, unaccompanied by that division of responsi- bility, in other matters so much approved of by the bourgeoisie, and unaccompanied by the still more approved representative system, this code is but the capitalistic caricature of that social regulation of the labour-process which becomes requisite in co-operation on a great scale, and in the employment in com- mon, of instruments of labour and especially of machinery. MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 473 or of domestic industry, to the rent of the workrooms, x &c. 1644.) "Is there a sufficiency of schools?"— "No" ... of Fact., 30th April, 1858," p. 3 2 5 " 3. c, p. Instead of being set free, a part of the capital is here locked up in such a way as to cease to be exchanged against labour-power: variable has been changed into constant capital. Throughout this Book therefore, by constant capital advanced for the production of value, we always mean, unless the context is repugnant thereto, the value of the means of production actually consumed in the process, and that value alone. 2 (piece-work), so advantageous to the employer ... . Rep., 1864, pp. The labour-power is sold, al- though it is only paid for at a later period. In addition to its special use-value as a commodity (gold, for instance, serving to stop teeth, to form the raw material of articles of luxury, &c), it acquires a formal use-value, originat- ing in its specific social function. 20. The average daily pay for a man is 2s. He was able to rear his pig and keep fowl . m. Rh. Z. Hence the production of raw material must be quadrupled. . 2 Different operations take, however, unequal periods, and yield therefore, in equal times unequal quantities of fractional products. It has already been remarked above that the equivalent form of a commodity does not imply the determination of the magni- tude of its value. 1 And, indeed, experience shows to the intelligent observer with what swiftness and grip the capitalist mode of production, dating, historically speaking, only from yesterday, has seized the vital power of the people by the very root — shows how the degeneration of the industrial population is only retarded by the constant absorption of primitive and physically uncorrupted elements from the country— shows how even the country labourers, in spite of fresh air and the princi- ple of natural selection, that works so powerfully amongst them, and only permits the survival of the strongest, are already be- ginning to die off. Here, then, we see in Man- ufacture the immediate technical foundation of Modern Industry. In the for- mer, he acts as the motive power of capital, and belongs to the capitalist. "When a labourer," said Mr. Ashworth, a cotton magnate, 1 "It has been estimated, roughly, that the first individual of a newly- invented machine will cost about five times as much as the construction of the second." (Babbage, 1. The expanded form of relative value, which is the expression of the value of one commodity in terms of all other commodities, endows those other commodities with the character of particu- lar equivalents differing in kind. The value of one commodity is to the value of any other, as the labour-time necessary for the production of the one is to that necessary for the production of the 1 "The value of them (the necessaries of life), when they are exchanged the one for another, is regulated by the quantity of labour necessarily re- quired, and commonly taken in producing them." ("Some Thoughts on the Interest of Money in General, and Particularly in the Publick Funds, &c." Lond., p. Therefore also riches, such as Chrematistic strives for, are unlimited. 705, 725.) III. Say, who pretends to account for surplus-value (Interest, Profit, Rent), by the "services produc- tifs" which the means of production, soil, instruments, and raw material, render in the labour-process by means of their use-values. 31, 32.) Without noticing any other oddities, it suffices to observe, that what re-appears in the fresh vigour, is not the bread's price, but its blood-forming substances. 3.) John Stuart Mill, who for a long time was an official of the East India Com- MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OF COMMODITIES 135 interval of time, from the realisation of their prices. as to the men, to outdoor labour on public works." ("Rep. From the analysis of the statistics of pauper- ism, two points are to be taken. The increase in the spindles was therefore 26.9% and in the looms 15.6%, while the number of the operatives decreased 7%. Similar laws in France, where by the middle of the 17th century a kingdom of vagabonds (truands) was established in 1 Thomas More says in his "Utopia": "Therfore that on covetous and unsatiable cormaraunte and very plage of his native contrey maye compasse aboute and inclose many thousand akers of grounde together within one pale or hedge, the husbandmen be thrust owte of their owne, or els either by co- ney ne and fraude, or by violent oppression they be put besydes it, or by wrongs and iniuries thei be so weried that they be compelled to sell all: by one meanes, therfore, or by other, either by hooke or crooke they muste needes de- parte awaye, poore, selye, wretched soules, men, women, husbands, wiues, fatherlesse children, widowes, wofull mothers with their yonge babes, and their whole household smal in substance, and muche in numbre, as husband- rye requireth many handes. Owing to this, the value of a part of the constant capital falls, and in proportion to the magnitude of the fall, the total value of the commodity also falls. And, however small its absolute increase, in proportion to the dwindling population it had increased largely. II, Minutes of Evidence. Here also we find deterioration in the housing and other conditions at the source of the surplus-population. Factory Inspector Leonard Horner conducted in his own person, and through his sub-inspectors, many examinations of witnesses in the factories of Lancashire. Not only accumulation, but the simple "conservation of a capital requires a constant effort to resist the temptation of consuming it." 4 The simple dictates of humanity therefore plainly enjoin the re- lease of the capitalist from this martyrdom and temptation, in the nence from working. At the same time, however, means of employment for an increased number of hands was ready in 110 new mills with 11,625 looms, 628,576 spindles and 2,695 total horse- power of steam and water (1. And be it enacted, that here- after no minor engaged in any factory shall be holden or required to work more than 10 hours in any day. of good wheaten bread, for men — more; for y the weekly average of adult men and women, at least 28,600 grains of carbon and 1,330 grains of nitrogen. 2 To the question, "If there were occasion to raise 40 millions p. Hat-making: 1851, 15,957: 1861, 13,814. 8 Reports, &c, for 30th April, 1849, p. 5 by 5 ft. CO CO >*H *TH q ■mT) co oo CD lO •^H o oo oo OS CM t>- CM o CM 00 CD vl* CM u CO > o S ' "s g-^-1 11 >>3 a .sl Jt 2 Si IS o-j o O Pi s E. The Highland Celts were organised in clans, each of which was the owner of the land on which it was settled. With it has spread the form of lockjaw, which a Vienna physician in 1845 discovered to be a disease peculiar to lucifer-matchmakers. Destined for productive consumption from the very first, this por- tion exists, for the most part, in the shape of articles totally un- fitted for individual consumption. We will assume, but merely for the sake of a paral- lel with the production of commodities, that the share of each individual producer in the means of subsistence is determined examples, ruins though they be, in India. Those commodities are the precious metals. 2 Favourable natural conditions alone, give us only the possi- bility, never the reality, of surplus-labour, nor, consequently, of surplus-value and a surplus-product. Master-manufac- turers know that there are various ways of raising and felling the price of labour, besides that of altering its nominal amount." (1. x The raw material, &c, is supplied by mechanical industry, the mass of cheap human material (taillable a merci et miseri- corde) is composed of the individuals "liberated" by mechanical industry and improved agriculture. But they now have to buy bread, and they have no refuse upon which they can feed a pig or fowl, and they have consequently no benefit from the sale of a pig, fowl, or eggs." 1 In fact, formerly, the agricultural labourers were but the smallest of the small farmers, and formed for the most part a kind of rear-guard of the medium and large farms on which they found employment. In showing how frequently it happens that adult per- sons of both sexes, married and unmarried, are huddled togeth- er in single small sleeping rooms, their reports have carried the conviction that, under the circumstances they describe, decency or £b annual rent for houses not worth j£20 in a really free market, but main- tained at their artificial value by the power of the owner to say 'Use my house, or go seek a hiring elsewhere, without a character from me.' .... The circumstance that they were "freed" by the ma- chinery, from the means of purchase, changed them from buyers into non-buyers. Modern Industry, as we have seen, sweeps away by techni- cal means the manufacturing division of labour, under which each man is bound hand and foot for life to a single detail- operation. If the price of each article be £2, and the sum of the prices to be realised be consequently £8, it follows that £8 in money must go into circulation. In their turn, the varying phases of the industrial cycle recruit the surplus-popula- tion, and become one of the most energetic agents of its reproduc- tion. 1866," p. (2.) Surplus-value and the value of labour-power vary in opposite directions. The population of Ireland had, in 1841, reached 8,222,664; in 1851, it had dwindled to 6,623,985; in 1861, to 5,850,309; in 1866, to 5y millions, nearly to its level in 1801. 11-13.) "There are certain expenses upon a mill which go on in the same proportion whether the mill be running short or full time, as, for instance, rent, rates, and taxes, insurance against fire, wages of several permanent servants, deterioration of machinery, with various other charges upon a manufacturing establishment, the proportion of which to profits increases as the production decreases." ("Rep. It is clear that, if the value created by a day's labour increases from, say, 6 to 8 shillings, then the two parts into which this value is divided, viz., price of labour-power and surplus-value, may both of them increase simultaneously, and either equally or unequally. Of the Christian colonial system, W. Of those under 20,835 were between 5 and 10 years, 30,701 between 10 and 15 years, 42,010 between 15 and 19 years. . sought to tide over the difficulty, by allowing the Bank of England to issue notes against silver bullion, on condition that the reserve of silver should never exceed more than one-fourth of the reserve of gold. 3 1. And this quantity of labour-time o does in fact exist in the 20 lbs. Here we find documentary evidence of the con- stant lowering of the price of labour from the beginning of the Anti- Jacobin War. and it is not a little curious that all the law-givers of Europe endeavoured to prevent this by statutes, viz., statutes against usury The power of the capitalist over all the 1 Industrial here in contradistinction to agricultural. c. embrace a diversity of occupa- tions, the customs in which differ greatly, and the use of mechanical power to give motion to machinery is no longer one of the elements necessary, as formerly, to constitute, in legal phrase, a 'Factory.'" (Reports, &c, for 31st October, 1864, p. "It seems to be a law of Nature that the poor should be to a certain degree im- provident" [i.e., so improvident as to be born without a silver spoon in the mouthj, "that there may always be some to fulfil 1 "De jour en jour il devient done plus clair que les rapports de pro- duction dans lesquels se meut la bourgeoisie n'ont pas un caractere un, un caractere simple, mais un caractere de duplicite; que dans les memes rap- ports dans lesquels se produit la richesse, la misere se produit aussi; que dans les memes rapports dans lesquels il y a developpement des forces produc- tives, il y a une force productive de repression; que ces rapports ne pro- duisent la richesse bourgeoise, e'est-a-dire la richesse de la classe bourgeoise, qu'en aneantissant continuellement la richesse des membres integrants de cette classe et en produisant un proletariat toujours croissant." (Karl Marx: "Misere de la Philosophie," p. It certainly augments the demand for the labour of children and increases the rate of their wages." On the other hand, this same dispenser of consolation defends the lowness of the children's wages on the ground that it prevents parents from sending their children at too early an age into the factory. 3 "An hour's labour lost in a day is a prodigious injury to a commer- cial State.... * Instruments of labour not only supply a standard of the degree of development to which human labour has attained, but they are also indicators of the social conditions under which that labour is carried on. 1 As a general law it follows that, given the amount of daily, weekly labour, &c, the daily or weekly wages depend on the price of labour which itself varies either with the value of labour- power, or with the difference between its price and its value. showed, moreover, that while, with the described circumstances, infants perish under the neglect and mismanage- ment which their mothers' occupations imply, the mothers become to a grievous extent denaturalised towards their offspring — commonly not trou- bling themselves much at the death, and even sometimes ... The truth of the proposition that, "although gold and silver are not by Nature money, money is by Nature gold and silver," 1 is shown by the fitness of the physical properties of these metals for the functions of money. was estimated at between £60 and £70 a year. Comm., II. The gang-system, which during the last years has steadily increased, 2 clearly does not exist for the sake of the gang-master. 2 As soon as this primitive dominion of the new mode of production was con- quered, it was found that, in the meantime, not only had many other branches of production been made to adopt the same factory system, but that manufactures with more or less obsolete methods, such as potteries, glass-making, &c, that old-fashioned handicrafts, like baking, and, finally, even that the so-called domestic indus- 1 "The conduct of each of these classes (capitalists and workmen) has been the result of the relative situation in which they have been placed." (Reports, &c, for 31st October, 1848, p. How far may the working-day be extended beyond the working-time necessary for the reproduction of labour-power itself?" It has been seen that to these ques- tions capital replies: the working-day contains the full 24 hours, with the deduction of the few hours of repose without which labour-power absolutely refuses its services again. Knight: What sorte is that which, ye sayde should have greater losse hereby, than these men had profit? . &c. 8 From a letter of Mr. Harris, Chief Constable ot Bolton, in "Rep. 1 "The circulating capital of a country," he says, "is its wage-fund. Paris vaut bien une messe. coffee or = 1 quarter corn or =2 ounces gold or=y ton iron or =&c.) J . I will give a few specimens culled from a dozen counties. A commodity can acquire a general expression of its value only by all other commodities, simultaneously with it, expressing their values in the same equivalent; and every new commodity must follow suit. Ill, p. 1865.-29,920,623 lbs. But if the 12 men are employed in six pairs, by as many different small masters, it will be quite a matter of chance, whether each of these masters produces the same value, and consequently whether he realises the general rate of surplus-value. 28.) 2 The Manchester Spinner (Times, 26th Nov., 1862) before referred to says in relation to this subject: "It (namely, the "allowance for deterioration of machinery") is also intended to cover the loss which is constantly arising from the superseding of machines before they are worn out, by others of a new and better construction." MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 405 introduced into an industry, new methods of reproducing it more cheaply follow blow upon blow, * and so do improvements, that not only affect individual parts and details of the machine, but its entire build. The relation between it and the values of commodities is this, that the latter are ideally expressed in the same quantities of gold that are symbolically represented by the paper. At the date of the Child. England, average of spindles per factory 12,600 France, " " " " " 1,500 Prussia, " " " " " 1,500 Belgium, " " " " " 4,000 Saxony, " " " " " 4,500 Austria, * " " 7,000 Switzerland," " " " " 8,000 AVERAGE NUMBER OF PERSONS EMPLOYED TO SPINDLES. 2 It is not because he is a leader of industry that a man is a capitalist; on the contrary, he is a leader of industry be- cause he is a capitalist. The realisation of a commodity's price, or of its ideal value-form, is therefore at the same time the realisation of the ideal use-value of money; the conversion of a commodity into money, is the simul- taneous conversion of money into a commodity. Diminution of the variable capital may therefore be compensated RATE AND MASS OF SURPLUS-VALUE 305 by a proportionate rise in the degree of exploitation of labour- power, or the decrease in the number of the labourers employed by a proportionate extension of the working-day. Edited by Gen. It was, there- fore, quite in order that the virgins, who, at the feast of the Goddess of Love, gave themselves up to strangers, should offer to the goddess the piece of money they received. 4 As an exam- ple of the method 5 obtaining in the 19th century, the "clearing" made by the Duchess of Sutherland will suffice here. Bibl. Morgan, Lond., 1803, v. "It is, however, in reality, impossible (it; jjlsv gov akrfisia dSovaiov), that such unlike things can be com- mensurable"— i.e., qualitatively equal. The re- sult of the labour of the one is the starting-point for the labour of the other. of yarn, our first step is to calculate the quantity of labour real- ised in it. "The children gradually tire and become as restless as birds towards the end of their long detention at an occupa- tion that is monotonous, eye-straining, and exhausting from the uniformity in the posture of the body. 1 Wakefield, 1. It is also favoured by the circumstance that preparatory needlework, and certain other operations, are most conveniently done on the premises where the machine is at work; as well as by the inevitable expropriation of the hand sewers, and of the domestic workers who work with their own machines. The Statute of Labourers was passed at the urgent instance of the House of Commons. . Therefore in order that our in- vestigation may lead to accurate results, we must make abstrac- tion from that portion of the value of the product, in which con- stant capital alone appears, and consequently must equate the constant capital to zero or make c=0. — 4,570,581 lbs. The colonies secured a market for the budding manufactures, and, through the mo- nopoly of the market, an increased accumulation. 2 The system actually prevalent in England is, that the capitalist concentrates a large number of machines on his premises, and then distributes the produce of those machines for further mani- pulation amongst the domestic workers. the products ... 2.) "The stock and riches of the kingdom cannot properly be confined to money, nor ought gold and silver to be excluded from being merchandise." ("The East-India Trade a Most Profitable Trade." London, 1677, p. rising and falling in ... Lond., 1862.) 774 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION Australian labour-market," and prostitution in some places there flourishes as wantonly as in the London Haymarket. ... The English bourgeoisie acted for its own interest quite as wisely as did the Swedish bourgeoisie who, reversing the proc- ess, hand in hand with their economic allies, the peasantry, helped the kings in the forcible resumption of the Crown lands from the oligarchy. 3 "If the price of labour should rise so high that, notwithstanding the increase of capital, no more could be employed, I should say that such in- crease of capital would be still unproductively consumed." (Ricardo, 1. The Repeal of the Corn Laws, and of the duties on cotton and other raw material; Free-trade proclaimed as the guiding star of legislation; in a word, the arrival of the mil- lennium. Saunders: "Further steps towards a reformation of society can never be carried out with any hope of success, unless the hours of labour be limited, and the pre- scribed limit strictly enforced." 2 It must be acknowledged that our labourer comes out of the process of production other than he entered. chiefly from their small tenants, who are obliged to attend when required to do the land- lord's work, at rates of wages, in many instances, considerably under the current rates paid to ordinary labourers, and without regard to the inconvenience or loss to the tenant of being obliged to neglect his own business at critical periods of sowing or reaping." 6 The uncertainty and irregularity of employment, the constant return and long duration of gluts of labour, all these symptoms of a relative surplus-population, figure therefore in the reports of the Poor Law administration, as so many hardships of the agri- cultural proletariat. . injury to the delicate moving parts of metallic mecha- nism by inaction." (Ure, 1. A glance at table 1 As Ireland is regarded as the promised land of the "principle of popu- lation," Th. Sadler, before the publication of his work on population, issued his famous book, "Ireland, its Evils and their Remedies." 2nd edition, London, 1829. In other cases each set works 24 hours consecutively on alternate days, one set working 6 hours on Monday, and 18 on Saturday to make up the 24 hours. of tea 40 lbs. Hence, it is a law, based on the very nature of manufac- ture, that the minimum amount of capital, which is bound to be in the hands of each capitalist, must keep increasing; in other words, 360 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION that the transformation into capital of the social means of produc- tion and subsistence must keep extending. All that I wish to draw attention to here is the existence of an irresistible tendency towards the general application of those principles. I 1 Daily Telegraph, 17th January, 1860. The price of labour falls again to a level corresponding with the needs of the self-expansion of capital, whether the level be below, the same as, or above the one which was normal before the rise of wages took place. Murray, 12 years of age, says: "I turn jigger, and run moulds. Insp. l 1 In France, the regisseur, steward, collector of dues for the feudal lords during the earlier part of the^middle ages, soon became an homme d'affaires, who by extortion, cheating, &c, swindled himself into a capitalist. The questions of the Committee of Emigration, and Mr Turner's answers, show how the competition of human labour is main- tained against machinery. 66.) 2 A. This law of capitalistic society would sound absurd to savages, or even civilised colonists. Polit." Petersbourg, 1815, t. Capitalist production is not merely the pro- duction of commodities, it is essentially the production of sur- plus-value. II. For the second time the Gaels were hunt- ed out. 2 Besides, capital with its accompanying relations springs up from an economic soil that is the product of a long process of development. of these .... The over- work of the employed part of the working-class swells the ranks of the reserve, whilst conversely the greater pressure that the latter by its competition exerts on the former, forces these to submit to over-work and to subjugation under the dictates of capital. The course characteristic of modern industry, viz., a decennial cycle (interrupted by smaller oscillations), of periods of average activity, production at high Econ.," Lond. He found that in this locality, where much labour is employed, various cots had been destroyed and no new ones built. All other things being equal, the mass and value of the product will rise in direct proportion to the labour expended. surpl. 2 "Rep. 3 The second kind of manufacture, its perfected form, pro- duces articles that go through connected phases of development, 1 In the year 1854 Geneva produced 80,000 watches, which is not one- fifth of the production in the Canton of Neufchatel. Kirchmann von Rodbertus. . But, in the act of seeing, there is at all events, an actual passage of light from one thing to another, from the external object to the eye. It must have its origin both in circulation and yet not in circulation. Their functions, as well as their names, are constantly interchanged. Thereupon the individual machine, that we have hitherto been considering, sinks into a mere factor in production by machinery. As this point is the pivot on which a clear comprehension of Political Economy turns, we must go more into detail. Ferguson: "History of Civil Society." Edinburgh, 1767; Part iv, sect, ii., p. The totality of the necessaries of life consists, however, of various commodities, each the product of 316 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION a distinct industry; and the value of each of those commodities enters as a component part into the value of labour-power. 1 In wage-labour, on the contrary, even surplus-labour, or unpaid labour, appears as paid. 8 The agitation for a working-day of 8 hours has now (1867) begun in Lancashire among the factory operatives. I demand, therefore, a work- ing-day of normal length, and I demand it without any appeal to your heart, for in money matters sentiment is out of place. The discovery of gold and silver in America, the extirpation, enslavement and entombment in mines of the aboriginal popula- tion, the beginning of the conquest and looting of the East Indies, the turning of Africa into a warren for the commercial hunting of black-skins, signalised the rosy dawn of the era of capitalist pro- duction. c, p. * Hence both the capitalist and his ideological representative, the political economist, consider that part alone of the labourer's individual consumption to be productive, which is requisite for the perpetuation of the class, and which therefore must take place in order that the capitalist may have labour-power to con- sume; what the labourer consumes for his own pleasure beyond that part, is unproductive consumption. As the author is himself a labourer and secretary of a Trades' Union, this might be taken for exaggeration. The labourers are first driven from the land, and then come the sheep. Leonce de Lavergne has hastened to repeat this on the other side of the Channel. 2 It would be possible to write quite a history of the inventions, made since 1830, for the sole purpose of supplying capital with weapons against the revolts of the working-class. The sum of the prices to be realised in the day is £8, the number of moves of the two pieces of money is four, and the quantity of money circulating is £2. Given the length of the 1 Senior, "Letters on the Factory Act." London, 1837, pp. Very important materials for the fluctuation of wages during that period are to be found in the Blue books: "Report and Evidence from the Select Committee on Petitions respecting the Corn Laws" (Parliamentary Session of 1813-14), and "Report from the Lords' Committee, on the state of the Growth, Commerce, and Consumption of Grain, and all Laws relating thereto" (Session of 1814-15). 1 From what has been shown so far, it follows that piece-wage is the form of wages most in harmony with the capitalist mode of production. The father and one child slept outside, but the difficulty of securing isolation was seen here, for in the crowded market of the miserable village lay the linen of the fever-stricken household, waiting for the wash. All combined labour on a large scale requires, more or less, a directing authority, in order to secure the harmonious working of the individual activities, and to perform the general functions CO-OPERATION 331 that have their origin in the action of the combined organism, as distinguished from the action of its separate organs. Widerlegung der Ricardo'schen Lehre von der Grundrente und Begriindung einer neuen Rententheorie." Berlin, 1851. At the same time portions of the original capitals disengage themselves and function as new independent capitals. . The Christian religion, e.g., is "useful," "because it forbids in the name of religion the same faults that the penal code condemns in the name of the 610 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION of the process of production, as, e.g., its sudden expansions and contractions, nay, even accumulation itself, become perfectly inconceivable. Great competition was shown between the different firms 454 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION A necessary condition, therefore, to the growth of the number of factory hands, is a proportionally much more rapid growth of the amount of capital invested in mills. There alone rule Freedom, Equality, Property and Bentham. TIME-WAGES 545 as to the income of the labourer's family, as soon as the quantity of labour expended by the head of the family is increased by the labour of the members of his family. In this connexion we consider only its useful effect. Then the masters exclaim with one voice: "The factory operatives should keep in wholesome remembrance the fact that theirs is really alow species of skilled labour; and that there is none which is more easily acquired, or of its quality more amply remunerated, or which, by a short training of the least expert, can be more quickly, as well as abundantly, acquired.... A, for instance, cannot be "your majesty" to B, unless at the same time majesty in B's eyes assumes the bodily form of A, and, what is more, with every 1 The celebrated Franklin, one of the first economists, after Wm. Petty, who saw through the nature of value, says: "Trade in general being nothing else but the exchange of labour for labour, the value of all things is ... 1,098,261 All who are employed in cotton, woollen, worsted, flax, hemp, silk, and jute fac- tories, in stocking making and lace making by machinery, 642,607* All who are employed in coal mines and metal mines, 565,835 All who are employed in metal works (blast-furnaces, rolling mills, &c), and metal manufactures of every kind, . 2 On the other hand, the remaining r^ths of the product, or 4 lbs. 37. This phe- nomenal form, which makes the actual relation invisible, and, indeed, shows the direct opposite of that relation, forms the basis of all the juridical notions of both labourer and capitalist, of all the mystifications of the capitalistic mode of production, of all its illusions as to liberty, of all the apologetic shifts of the vul- gar economists. 1. It would seem therefore that the interest of capital itself points in the direction of a normal working-day. As soon as tools had been converted from being manual im- plements of man into implements of a mechanical apparatus, of a machine, the motive mechanism also acquired an independent form, entirely emancipated from the restraints of human strength. In this inquiry we have neglected all effects of the process of circulation, effects which may produce very different degrees of efficiency in the same mass of capital. 1 This resistance is moreover lessened by the apparent lightness of machine work, and by the more pliant and docile character of the women and children employed on it. The action of the law of supply and demand of labour on this basis completes the despotism of capital. xvii. It is an assemblage of many properties, and may therefore be of use in various ways. Secondly, the time occupied in the labour of production must not exceed the time really nec- essary under the given social conditions of the case. Indeed, the reductioji in the cost of weav- ing, in the case of many descriptions of ribbons, has not been accompanied by any corresponding reduction in the selling price of the manufactured arti- cle." (Mr. F. For instance, after propounding the "doctrine" stated above, that capital, with the aid of science taken into its pay, always reduces the refractory hand of labour to docility, he grows indignant because "it(physico- mechanical science) has been accused of lending itself to the rich capitalist as an instrument for harassing the poor." After preach- ing a long sermon to show how advantageous the rapid develop- ment of machinery is to the working-classes, he warns them, that by their obstinacy and their strikes they hasten that development. 16.) 1 "The principle of the factory system, then, is to substitute ... Nevertheless, an increased quantity of material wealth may correspond to a simultaneous fall in the mag- nitude of its value. per week. 2 But here we are dealing with exchange-value. "Gentlemen of the jury, no doubt the throat of this commercial traveller has been cut. . When they are not on the march, they "camp." Nomad labour is used for various operations of building and draining, brick-making, lime-burning, railway-making, &c. Then it seems money is not his want, but a price for his corn and cattel, which he would sell, but cannot... To produce this effect, it is by no means requisite that the prices of all commodities should rise or fall simultaneously. Form B shows that only one single commodity at a time can completely expand its relative value, and that it acquires this expanded form only because, and in so far as, all other commodities are, with respect to it, equivalents. A machine-factory, says Ure, "displayed the division of labour in manifold gradations— the file, the drill, the lathe, having each its different workman in the order of skill." (P. m., and at the beginning and end of the times nominally fixed for meals, is nearly equivalent to working 13 months in the year." 2 Crises during which production is interrupted and the fac- tories work "short time," i.e., for only a part of the week, natu- rally do not affect the tendency to extend the working-day. The spindles and looms, formerly scattered over the face of the country, are now crowded together in a few great labour-barracks, together with the labourers and the raw material. The constitution of these communities varies in different parts of India. 4 Ferguson had already said, 1. 9.) "The work which obtains the scanty pittance of food, is, for the most part, excessively prolonged." ("Public Health, Sixth Report," 1864, p. 1 On the other hand, the English cotton machinery produced an acute effect in India. 3 In reality, the individual consumption of the labourer is unproductive as regards himself, for it reproduces noth- ing but the needy individual; it is productive to the capitalist and to the State, since it is the production of the power that creates their wealth. THE LABOUR-PROCESS 187 assume, bought it at its full value, say of ten shillings. . These individual differences, or "errors" as they are called in mathematics, compensate one another, and vanish, whenever a certain minimum number of workmen are employed together. A few acres to the cottage would make the labourers too independent." 1 The process of forcible expropriation of the people received in the 16th century a new and frightful impulse from the Refor- mation, and from the consequent colossal spoliation of the church property. Only since the catastrophe of 1846 1 1. Ferguson, 1. Capital, therefore, is not only, as Adam Smith says, the com- mand over labour. c, p. Then the new capital of £2,000 functions in the spinning-mill, and brings in, in its turn, a surplus-value of £400. The price of the la- bour-power is fixed by the contract, although it is not realised till later, like the rent of a house. 5 The "Public Health Report," where in dealing with the subject of children's mortality, the gang-system is treated in passing, remains un- known to the press, and, therefore, to the English public. Schouw: "Die Erde, die Pflanzen und der Mensch," 2. 2 Apart from the new power that arises from the fusion of many forces into one single force, mere social contact begets in most in- dustries an emulation and a stimulation of the animal spirits that heighten the efficiency of each individual workman. c, pp 915, 916.) 120 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION morphosis consists, are gone through, not simultaneously, but suc- cessively. 116.) THE LABOUR-PROCESS 179 not every subject of labour is raw material: it can only become so, after it has undergone some alteration by means of labour. Between the two there is a strict correlation. Side by side with the masses thus occupied with one and the same work, we find the "chief inhabitant," who is judge, police, and tax-gatherer in one; the book-keeper, who keeps the accounts of the tillage and registers everything relating thereto; another official, who prosecutes criminals, protects strangers travelling through and escorts them to the next village; the boundary man, who guards the boundaries against neighbouring communities; the water-overseer, who distributes the water from the common tanks for irrigation; the Brahmin, who conducts the religious services; the schoolmaster, who on the sand teaches the children reading and writing; the calendar-Brahmin, or astrologer, who makes known the lucky or unlucky days for seed-time and harvest, and for every other kind of agricultural work; a smith and a carpenter, who make and repair all the agricultural implements; the potter, who makes all the pottery of the village; the barber, the washerman, who washes clothes, the silversmith, here and there the poet, who 1 "On peut ... l 1 The advance of industry, whose involuntary promoter is the bour- geoisie, replaces the isolation of the labourers, due to competition, by their revolutionary combination, due to association. : r ft but by the ca- working-day ot a given number or hours J pacity for work of the producer. 30.) 2 On the means that the wording of this Act afforded tor its violation cf. Had we gone further, and inquired under what cir- cumstances all, or even the majority of products take the form of commodities, we should have found that this can only happen with production of a very specific kind, capitalist production. It develops, along with the qualitative sub-division of the social labour-proc- ess, a quantitative rule and proportionality for that process. 147. Of course, it may be said in one sense, that the labourer preserves old value always in proportion to the quantity of new value that he adds. The best of it is that Carey, a great Russophile by the way, wants to prevent the process of separation by that very system of protec- tion which accelerates it. This aspect, from the standpoint of use-value alone, is taken as well by Plato, 4 who treats division of labour as the foundation on which the division of society into classes is based, as by 1 Amongst the moderns may be excepted a few writers of the 18th century, like Beccaria and James Harris, who with regard to division of labour almost entirely follow the ancients. THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 683 of eviction .... Thus, on the one hand, the technical reason for the life-long annexation of the workman to a detail function is re- moved. to work 14 hours a day with or without meals," &c. 1 Anew type of workman springs into life along with the machine, namely, its maker. In other cases an intermediate system 260 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION Let us now hear how capital itself regards this 24 hours' sys- tem. Instead of one exchange- value, the wheat has, therefore, a great many. They were transformed into an element of constant capital. 280. The employes themselves fixed the price and plundered at will the unhappy Hindus. In the same way, also, the special, concrete, useful kind of labour embodied in each particular equivalent, is pre- sented only as a particular kind of labour, and therefore not as an exhaustive representative of human labour generally. He will, caeteris paribus, labour 6 days a week as before, 3 for himself, 3 for his lord, who thenceforth becomes a wages- paying capitalist. Whence then is to come the internal market for capital? The United States are, speaking economically, still only a Colony of Europe. viii. 2 Interesting details on this fish trade will be found in Mr. David Urqu- hart's Portfolio, new series.— Nassau W. Their brain ceased to think, their eyes to see. We must, therefore, have recourse to their guardians, who are also their owners. Empl. Labour-time, as a measure of value, is not, however, affected in this case, except in so far as the duration of labour, and the degree of its intensity, are two antithetical and mutually exclusive expressions for one and the same quantity of labour. 772 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION Undoubtedly, farm-horses in England, being a valuable property, are better fed than English peasants." 1 But, never mind, na- tional wealth is, once again, by its very nature, identical with misery of the people. 1667, p. The fantastic notions about raising or lowering the mint -price of money by transferring to greater or smaller weights of gold or silver the names already legally appropriated to fixed weights of those metals; such notions, at least in those cases in which they aim, not at clumsy financial operations against creditors, both public and private, but at economic quack remedies, have been so exhaustively treated by Wm. Petty in his "Quantulumcunaue concerning money: To the Lord Marquis of Halifax, 1682," that even his immediate followers, Sir Dudley North and John Locke, not to mention later ones, could only dilute him. c, p. As soon as man, instead of working with an implement on the subject of his labour, becomes merely the motive power of an implement-machine, it is a mere accident that motive power takes the disguise of human muscle; and it may equally well take the form of wind, water or steam. The first steel-pens were supplied by the handicraft system, in the year 1820, at 1 "Ch. Empl. Com., I. The knowledge, the judgment, and the will, which, though in ever so small a degree, are practised by the independent peasant or handicraftsman, in the same way as the savage makes the whole art of war consist in the exercise of his personal cunning— these faculties are now required only for the workshop as a whole. Since the first metamorphosis of a commodity is at once a sale and a purchase, it is also an independent process in itself. An official report says: "This one town of Macassar, e.g., is full of secret prisons, one more horrible than the other, crammed with unfortunates, victims of greed and tyranny fettered in chains, forcibly torn from their families." To secure Malacca, the Dutch corrupted the Portuguese governor. We take the total value of the product and put the constant capital which merely re-appears in it, equal to zero. and 9 p. * Of these facts, Dr. Simon in his General Health Report says: 'That cases are innumerable in which defective diet is the cause or the aggravator of disease, can be affirmed by any one who is conversant with poor law medi- cal practice, or with the wards and out-patient rooms of hospi- tals. We begin to understand what becomes of the immense quantities of goods conjured up by the magic of machinery, and of the enormous masses of workpeople, which that machinery sets free. Proudhon, 1847, p. Another company which returns £190,000 i9 finally compelled to admit that the true return should be £250,000." (Ibid., p 42.) 650 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION the result that from 1851 to 1861 the number of farms of less than 100 acres had fallen from 31,583 to 26,597, so that 5,016 had been thrown together into larger farms. . Polit." 158 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION the exchange, a value equal to that which he acquired by means of that operation." 1 The result is not altered by introducing money, as a medium of circulation, between the commodities, and making the sale and the purchase two distinct acts. The conversion of this mere possibility into a reality is the result of a long series of relations, that, from our present standpoint of simple circulation, have as yet no existence. CAPITALIST PRODUCTION Machinery also revolutionises out and out the contract be^ tween the labourer and the capitalist, which formally fixes their mutual relations. The essence of a free colony, on the contrary, consists in this — that the bulk of the soil is still public property, and every settler on it therefore can turn part of it into his private property and individual means of production, without hindering the later set- tlers in the same operation. m. Thenceforth a phenomenon that we have already met with, name- ly, the intensification of labour, develops into great importance. Surplus-labour Surplus-value ., - mer. Like all other great modern industries, it constantly produces, by incessant fluctuations, a relative surplus-population within its own sphere, even with an absolute increase in the mass of human beings absorbed by it. On the other hand, it is evident that the duration of the sur- plus-labour is given, when the length of the working-day, and the value of labour-power, are given. ... They promised, therefore, not only a double-sized loaf of bread, but the enact- ment of the Ten Hours' Bill in the Free-trade millennium. Petty, John Bellers, Andrew Yarranton, "The Advantages of the East India Trade," and J. It is the quantity of labour required for its production, not the realised form of that labour, by which the amount of the value of a commodity is determined. . The open vil- lages which supply the contingent of the gang, become Sodoms and Gomorrahs, 1 and have twice as high a rate of illegitimate births as the rest of the kingdom. Despite all this Mr. Redgrave says: "This kind of labour, however, would only be sought after when none other could be pro- cured, for it is a high-priced labour The ordinary wages of a boy of 13 would be about 4s. This work, the fruit of patient and diligent labour, contains in the two volumes that have so far appeared, only the period from 1259 to 1400. . 3 The reason of this is that man is, if not as Aris- totle contends, a political, 4 at all events a social animal. It is at the same time consumption of his labour-power by the capitalist who bought it. Some of the manufacturers, even, who had man- aged their factories in conformity with the Act of 1833, overwhelmed Parliament with memorials on the immoral com- petition of their false brethren whom greater impudence, or more fortunate local circumstances, enabled to break the law. Thus, knives that are adapted to cut all sorts of things, may, on the whole, be of one shape; but an implement destined to be used exclusively in oneway must have a different shape tor every different use." 342 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION conditions for the existence of machinery, which consists of a combination of simple instruments. 2 Classical Political Economy borrowed from every-day life the category "price of labour" without further criticism, and then sim- ply asked the question, how is this price determined? To be a productive labourer is, therefore, not a piece of luck, but a misfortune. He won't be caught napping again. 4 1 "The rate of payment for over-time (in lace-making) is so small, from y 2 d. 120.) 2 Cromwell's time forms an exception. The inversion, therefore, of the order of succession, does not take us outside the sphere of the simple circulation of commodities, and we must rather look, whether there is in this simple circulation anything permitting an ex- pansion of the value that enters into circulation, and, consequent- ly, a creation of surplus-value. . A commodity is, in the first place, an object outside us, a thing that by its properties satisfies human wants of some sort or another. Now, it is true that the tailoring, which makes the coat, is concrete labour of a different sort from the weaving which makes the linen. Hence it is natural that the lengthening of the working-day, which capital, from the middle of the 14th to the end of the 17th century, tries to impose by State-measures on adult labourers, approximately coincides with the shortening of the working- day which", in the second half of the 19th century, has here and there been effected by the State to prevent the coining of children's blood into capital. c, p. I shall give an account of a recent campaign by the English manufacturers against the Clauses in the Factory Acts that protect the "hands" against dangerous machinery. But, just as in the beginning, the only participators in the labour-process were man and the earth, which latter exists independently of man, so even now we still employ in the process many means of production, provided directly by Nature, that do not represent any combina- tion of natural substances with human labour. The swollen value of the yarn is of no avail, for it is merely the sum of the values formerly existing in the cotton, the spindle, and the labour-power: out of such a simple addition of existing values, no surplus-value can possibly arise. Dr. Simon, medical officer of the Privy Council, in his official Report says: "In apology for the wretched house- hold accommodation ... By degrees there arises a discrepancy between the current money-names of the various weights of the precious metal figuring as money, and the actual weights which those names originally represented. 2 Some gang-masters, however, have worked themselves up to the posi- tion of farmers of 500 acres, or proprietors of whole rows of houses. Wages fall, and now we have the reverse of the medal. 56. On the one hand, the old world constantly throws in capital, thirsting after exploi- tation and "abstinence"; on the other, the regular reproduction of the wage-labourer as wage-labourer comes into collision with im- pediments the most impertinent and in part invincible. In a society where all products assume the form of commodities, these commodities must be sold after they have been produced, it is only after their sale that they can serve in satisfying the requirements of their producer. Answer: Because the Hindus bury their money. It is not the pos- session of land, or of money, but the command of labour which distinguishes the opulent from the labouring part of the commu- nity . If the price of labour-power fall to this minimum, it falls below its value, since under such circumstances it can be maintained and developed only in a crippled state. The circulation of money as capital is, on the contrary, an end in itself, for the ex- pansion of value takes place only within this constanly renewed 1 "Capital is divisible ... THE INCOME-TAX ON THE SUBJOINED 1860 18*61 Schedule A. Between 1861 and 1870 the number of male servants nearly doubled itself. iNow, sir, fancy his astonishment on being paid 6—- days for the whole. of yarn, having a value of 30 shillings. . /. Thos a French poet of the period enumerates amongst the goods to be found in the market of Landit, not only clothing, shoes, leather, agricultural implements, &c, but also "femmes lolles de leur corps." 2 Proudhon begins by taking his ideal of justice, of "justice eternelle," from the juridical relations that correspond to the production of commodi- ties: thereby, it may be noted, he proves, to the consolation of all good citi- zens, that the production of commodities is a form of production as everlasting as justice. We will further assume that the wear and tear of the spindle, which, for our present purpose, may represent all other instruments of la- bour employed, amounts to the value of 2s. The manufacturers, however, did not allow this "progress" without a compensating "retrogression." At their instigation the House of Commons reduced the minimum age for exploit- able children from 9 to 8, in order to assure that additional sup- ply of factory children which is due to capitalists, according to divine and human law. If the ratio of surplus-labour to necessary labour were 100%, these 66 men would produce in one hour a value of 30 shillings, although their wages, 15 shillings, represent only their labour for half an hour. The vendor sells an exist- ing commodity, the purchaser buys as the mere representative of money, or rather of future money. But to be equated to linen, and again to iron, is to be as different as are linen and iron. What makes them exchangeable is the mutual desire of their owners to alie- nate them. The 'great pub- lic opinion" was, in fact, of Mr. Potter's opinion, that the factory operatives are part of the movable fittings of a factory. * The conditions of its sale, whether the whole, Doctor, your meaning is good; but I think you will not succeed this time. Here is an instance. On the one hand all labour is, speaking physiologically, an expenditure of human labour-power, and in its character of iden- tical abstract human labour, it creates and forms the value of commodities. et s'approprient tous les bienfaits qui resultent de la diminution des frais du travail, de l'abondance des productions, et du bon marche des consommations. For our purpose, it suf- fices to consider the 5 years from 1861-1865 during which over half-a-million emigrated, and the absolute 'number of people sank by more than l \ s of a million. 248.) 530 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION (2.) Increasing intensity and productiveness of labour with simultaneous shortening of the working-day Increased productiveness and greater intensity of labour, both have a like effect. In the 43rd year of her reign the nation was obliged to recognise pau- perism officially by the introduction of a poor-rate. In order to keep the lace clean, and although the floor is tiled or flagged, the children are often compelled, even in winter, to pull off their shoes. At Nadby, over-crowded cot- tages generally, with only 2 bedrooms, belonging for the most part to the farmers. of 1 2 cotton, worth 13^- shillings; but the 6-~- shillings additional value contained in it, are the equivalent for the cotton consumed in 2 spinning the remaining 6-5- lbs. Two years earlier, the same House of Commons and the same Mr. Gladstone in the well-known straightforward fashion brought in a bill for the abolition of all exceptional penal legis- lation against the working-class. from the answer of the manager of some large rolling-mills, who, when I asked him how the place of the boys absent from their turn was made up, 'I daresay, sir, you know that as well as I do,' and admitted the fact." 3 "At a rolling-mill where the proper hours were from 6 a. Nay, more, the excessive prolongation of the working-day turned out to be the peculiar product of Modern Industry. Such is seed in agriculture. And as i'appetit vient en mangeant, Rentroll's eyes will soon discover that Ireland, with 3y millions, is still always miserable, and mis- erable because she is over-populated. And the oppressions are daily on the increase. 374 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION of the machine, which is the product of machinery. 3 Abstractedly considered, that is, apart from circumstances not immediately flowing from the laws of the simple circulation of commodities, there is in an exchange nothing (if we except the replacing of one use-value by another) but a metamorphosis, a mere change in the form of the commodity. 4 The cleanly weeded land, and the uncleanly human weeds, of Lincolnshire, are pole and counterpole of capitalistic production. The other part he lays out in living labour-power. On the one hand, then, we assume that the capitalist sells at their value the commodities he has produced, without concerning 1. THE WORK-ING-DAY £59 1 8^- p. The material of variable capi- tal, i.e., the mass of the means of subsistence it represents for the labourer, or the so-called labour-fund, was fabled as a sepa- rate part of social wealth, fixed by natural laws and unchangeable. It is the expression of equiv- alence between different sorts of commodities that alone brings into relief the specific character of value-creating labour, and this it does by actually reducing the different varieties of labour COMMODITIES 51 embodied in the different kinds of commodities to their common quality of human labour in the abstract. He says:] "The demand for labour depends on the increase of circulating, and not of fixed capital. 612 CHAPTER XXV THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION SECTIONl .—THE INCREASED DEMAND FOR LABOUR-POWER THAT ACCOMPANIES ACCUMULATION, THE COMPOSITION OF CAPITAL REMAINING THE SAME In this chapter we consider the influence of the growth of capital on the lot of the labouring class. At the same rate, then, as the conversion of products into commodities is being accom- plished, so also is the conversion of one special commodity into money. A particular operation, though yesterday, perhaps, forming one out of the many operations conducted by one producer in creating a given commodity, may to-day separate itself from this connexion, may establish itself as an independ- ent branch of labour and send its incomplete product to market as an independent commodity. . "To push the sale of opiate ... * The necessity for a generalisation of the Factory Acts, for transforming them from an exceptional law relating to mechanical spinning and weaving — those first creations of machinery — into a law affecting social production as a whole, arose, as we have seen, from the mode in which Modern Industry was historically developed. c, t. Nor is it quite fair thus to maintain in idleness a number of persons, only to pinch others, who are likely, from their characters, if you can force them to work, to work with success." 1 Unfair as he finds it to spur on the industrial capitalist, by depriving his bread of its butter, yet he thinks it necessary to reduce the labourer's wages to a minimum "to keep him industrious." Nor does he for a moment conceal the fact, that the appropriation of unpaid labour is the secret of surplus-value. But the price of corn is seven times, and of flesh-meat and raiment about fifteen times higher. THE RELAY SYSTEM Constant capital, the means of production, considered from the standpoint of the creation of surplus-value, only exist to absorb labour, and with every drop of labour a proportional quantity of surplus-labour. As, in religion, man is governed by the products of his own brain, so in capitalistic production, he is governed by the products of his own hand. But at the same time it was necessary to produce the geometrically accurate straight lines, planes, circles, cylinders, cones, and spheres, required in the detail parts of the machines. de Mo- linari, 1. c, p. The modern history of capital dates from the creation in the 16th century of a world-embracing commerce and a world-embracing market. The ancients therefore denounced money as subversive of the economic and moral order of things. 212. The expenses of this education (excessively small in the case of ordinary labour-power), enter pro tanto into the total value spent in its production. 2 1. "Modern policy," says Dr. Richard Price also, "is, indeed, more favourable to the higher classes of people; and the consequences 1 James E. 909.) 112 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION value, a crystal into which the commodity eagerly solidifies, and in the second, dissolves into the mere transient equivalent- form destined to be replaced by a use-value. 2 This revolt of capital, after two years was at last crowned with victory by a decision of one of the four highest Courts of Justice in England, the Court of Exchequer, which in a case brought before it on February 8th, 1850, decided that the manufacturers were certainly acting against the sense of the Act of 1844, but that this Act itself contained certain words that ren- dered it meaningless. It once for all commands the same limit to the working-day in all shops and factories without distinction, whilst English legistation reluctantly yields to the pressure of circumstances, now on this point, now on that, and is getting lost in a hopelessly bewildering tangle of contradictory enactments. Since the whole of this value is contained in the 20 lbs. The time is come when the great public opinion of these islands must operate to save this 'working power' from those who would deal with it as they would deal with iron, and coal, and cotton." The Times' article was only a jeu d' esprit. The quantity of these necessaries is known at any given epoch of a given society, and can therefore be treated as a constant magnitude. Everything in the world that has been done wrong has been done wrong for the very best of reasons. Whoever, therefore, exposes the real state of things in the capitalistic em- ployment of machinery, is against its employment in any way, and is an enemy of social progress! 1 Exactly the reasoning of the celebrated Bill Sykes. Hoarding The continual movement in circuits of the two antithetical metamorphoses of commodities, or the never ceasing alternation of sale and purchase, is reflected in the restless currency of money, or in the function that money performs of a perpetuum mobile of circulation. What chiefly distinguishes a commodity from its owner is the fact, that it looks upon every other commodity as but the form of appearance of its own value. In many manual implements the distinction between man as mere motive power, and man as the workman or operator prop- erly so called, is brought into striking contrast. These aliquot parts, which thenceforth serve as units of money, are then subdivided into other aliquot parts with legal names, such as shilling, penny, &c. Therefore, when we say that a commodity is in the equivalent form, we express the fact that it is directly ex- changeable with other commodities. In the weaving industry, e.g., piece-wages had fall- en so low that in spite of the very great lengthening of the working- day, the daily wages were then lower than before. Paris, 1841, p. While division of labour in society at large, whether such division be brought about or not by exchange of commodities, is common to economic formations of society the most diverse, division of labour in the workshop, as practised by manufacture, is a special creation of the capitalist mode of production alone. In this case it is no longer necessary to bear in mind that he in his turn will become a seller. The equalisation of the most different kinds of labour can be the result only of an abstrac- tion from their inequalities, or of reducing them to their common denominator, viz., expenditure of human labour-power or human labour in the abstract. 41-42. 1 Credit-money springs directly out of the function of money as a means of payment. Given the new value produced = £180, which sum consequently represents the whole labour ex- pended during the process, then subtracting from it £90 the val- ue of the variable capital, we have remaining £90, the amount of the surplus-value. 2 This holds likewise for Germany, and especially for Prussia east of the Elbe. VALUE OP LABOUR-POWER AND WAGES 539 Let us next see how value (and price) of labour-power, pre- sent themselves in this transformed condition as wages. to 6 p. The new labour spent on the in- struments of labour, on the machinery, on the coal, and so on, must necessarily be less than the labour displaced by the use of the machinery; otherwise the product of the machine would be as dear, or dearer, than the product of the manual labour. The chief would be the in- crease of cost from employing men instead of boys. Individual consumption provides, on the one hand, the means for their maintenance and reproduction: on the other hand, it secures by the 1 "The labourers in the mines of S. Dryden anticipated these gentry: "Fox full fraught in seeming sanctity, That feared an oath, but like the devil would lie, That look'd like Lent, and had the holy leer, And durst not sin! before he said his prayer!" 2 Rep., 31st Oct., 1856, p. Wherefore, supposing payments in general to be of a mixed circle between one week and 13, then add 10 millions to r^, the half of which will be 5-7p, so as if we have 5-y millions we have enough." (William Petty: "Political Anatomy of Ireland." 1672. This is the absolute general law of capitalist accumu- lation. x Is Fourier wrong when he calls factories "tempered bagnos"? and it rises to 9s., that is a rise of 28YP er cent., which sounds very fine. Tremenheere, commis sioner to examine into "the grievances complained of by the journeymen bakers," &c, Lond. It is not the labour, but the instrument of labour, that serves as the starting-point of the machine. Live five miles off. But it was seen from the evidence that, by due care and previous arrangement, the apprehended difficulty would be got over; and accordingly, by clause 6 of section 6 of the Factory Acts Extension Act, passed during this Session of Parliament, an interval of eighteen months is given to them from the passing of the Act before they are required to conform to the meal hours, specified by the Factory Acts." 3 Hardly had the Act been passed when our friends the manufacturers found out: "The inconveni- ences we expected to arise from the introduction of the Factory Acts into our branch of manufacture, I am happy to say, have not aris- 1 "Report of Insp. These gentlemen consider lO-^- hours of labour as the normal working- day which includes ot course the normal surplus-labour. But there is unhappily evidence that those horrors continue as intense as they were. Without entering into the question of health, no one will hesitate, I think, to admit that, in a moral point of view, so entire an absorption of the time of the working-classes, without intermission, from the early age of 13, and in trades not subject to restriction, much younger, must be extremely pre- judicial, and is an evil greatly to be deplored.... But the difference is that in England, an industrial country, the indus- trial reserve recruits itself from the country districts, whilst in Ireland, an agricultural country, the agricultural reserve recruits itself from the towns, the cities of refuge of the expelled agricul- tural labourers. Sup- pose two equal quantities of socially necessary labour to be respec- tively represented by 1 quarter of wheat and £2 (nearly */ 2 oz. 599.) 2 Thus from 1844-47 he withdrew part of his capital from productive employment, in order to throw it away in railway speculations; and so also, during the American Civil War, he closed his factory, and turned his work- people into the streets, in order to gamble on the Liverpool cotton exchange. The merchant and shopkeeper want money in the same man- ner, that is, they want a vent for the goods they deal in, by reason that the markets fail".. c, p. Moreover, not only were new huge silver deposits discovered in North America, in the Western part of the Rocky Mountains, but these and the Mexican silver mines were really opened up by the laying of railways, which made possible the shipment of modern machinery and fuel and in consequence the mining of silver on a very large scale at a low cost. c, p. The greatest evil of the system that employs young girls on this sort of work, consists in this, that, as a rule, it chains them fast from childhood for the whole of their after-life to the most abandoned rabble. . It becomes value only in its congealed state, when embodied in the form of some object. * Just as the offensive power of a squadron of cavalry, or the de- fensive power of a regiment of infantry, is essentially different from the sum of the offensive or defensive powers of the individual "Concours de forces." (Destutt de Tracy, 1. consists of wealth saved from revenue, and used with a view to profit." (R Jones: "An Introductory Lecture on Polit. 62.) The word labour is here wrongly used for labour-power. the farmer, while increasing his own gains, has prevented any accumulation on the part of his labouring dependants." 3 The part played in our days by the direct robbery from the labourer's necessary con- sumption-fund in the formation of surplus-value, and, therefore, of the accumulation-fund of capital, the so-called domestic indus- try has served to show. We conse- quently find that economists, who are thoroughly agreed as to labour-time being the measure of the magnitude of value, have the most strange and contradictory ideas of money, the perfected form of the general equivalent. In this case the agricultural labourer finds in him a second master, besides the farmer. The hour struck for the advent of machinery. Political Economy, which as an independent science, first sprang into being during the period of manufacture, views the social division of labour only from the standpoint of manufac- ture, 2 and sees in it only the means of producing more commodities 1 The simple belief in the inventive genius exercised a priori by the individual capitalist in division of labour, exists now-a-days only among German professors, of the stamp of Herr Roscher, who, to recompense the cap- italist from whose Jovian head division of labour sprang ready formed, dedicates to him "various wages" (diverse Arbeitslohne). 45.) 2 *[Note in the 4th German edition. On the basis of the production of commodities, where the means of production are the property of private persons, and where the artisan therefore either produces commodities, isolated from and independent of others, or sells his labour-power as a commodity, because he lacks the means for independent industry, co-operation on a large scale can realise itself only in the increase of individual capitals, only in proportion as the means of social production and the means of subsistence are transformed into the private property of capi- talists. The result of the whole process is, so far as concerns the objects themselves, C— C, the exchange of one commodity for 1 "£•/ 6s too .... 5 Reports, &c, for 31st Oct., 1861, p. extended these regu- lations of labour also to weavers, spinners, and all possible cate- gories of workers. On the share (overestimated by Marx) of Lau- rent and Gerhardt in the determination of this important fact see Kopp, "Ent wicklung der Chemie." Munchen, 1873, pp. The workers consist of men and women, adults and children of both sexes. 2d., and the surplus-value consequently not rise above 3s. Of course, this does not prevent such a change of form from producing great technical alterations in the mechanism that was originally constructed to be 1 Moses says: "Thou shalt not muzzle the ox that treads the corn." The Christian philanthropists of Germany, on the contrary, fastened a wooden board round, the necks of the serfs, whom they used as a motive power for grinding, in order to prevent them from putting flour into their mouths with their hands. 169.) 164 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION takes place entirely within the sphere of circulation. may be of the meanest description. Burke, 1. . Cotton, which required less careful preparation for its treatment by machinery, derived the benefit of the experience gained on wool, just as after- wards the manipulation of wool by machinery was developed on the lines of cotton-spinning and weaving by machinery.lt was only during the 10 years im- mediately preceding 1866, that isolated details of the wool manufacture, such as wool-combing, were incorporated in the factory system. were reci- pients of relief . — A favourite operation with manufacturers is to punish the workpeople by deductions made from their wages on account of faults in the material worked on. And since the application of animal power is one of man's earliest inventions, production by machinery would have preceded produc- tion by handicrafts. Of course it is very true, that if a bird's nest did not last longer than the time it takes in building, birds would have to do with- out nests. 64.) "The price of Labour is always consti- tuted of the price of necessaries ... . Although then, technically speaking, the old system of division of labour is thrown overboard by machinery, it hangs on in the factory, as a traditional habit handed down from Man- ufacture, and is afterwards S3 r stematically re-moulded and es* tablished in a more hideous form by capital, as a means of exploit- ing labour-power. All these are hereby thrown out of their livings with their families 1 Eden, 1. c.) 466 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION d. The mass of the means of production which he thus transforms, increases with the productiveness of his labour. Not even excepting our philosopher, Christian Wolff, in no time and in no country has the most home- spun commonplace ever strutted about in so self-satisfied a way. 111.) MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 483 combining education and gymnastics 1 with manual labour, and, consequently, of combining manual labour with education and gymnastics. It is only dur- ing the last decade (i.e., since 1856) that another American, Mr. Emery, of Albany, New York, has rendered Whitney's gin antiquated by an im- provement as simple as it is effective. In this position it is a thing in which we see nothing but value, or whose palpable bodily form represents value. 462,513 yds. 1 The result would be found yet more unfavourable if we went further back. of Insp. 1 Nevertheless an essential difference at once 1 Before the epoch of Mechanical Industry, the wool manufacture was the predominating manufacture in England. What is a loss of value to B is surplus-value to A; what is "minus" to one is "plus" to the other. * In the mean- time, however, circumstances had greatly changed. 1 The demand for children's labour often resembles in form the inquiries for negro slaves, such as were formerly to be read among the advertisements in American jour- nals. The minimum length of the working-day is fixed by this necessary but contractile portion of it. 2 Public Health, 3rd report, etc., pp. Wherever there is a working-day without restriction as to length, wherever there is night-work and unrestricted waste of human life, there the slightest obstacle presented by the nature of the work to a change for the better is soon looked upon as an everlasting barrier erected by Nature. But that is not my fault, it is the fault of the knife. Let us hear the Factory Inspectors. Dunning, 1. Its life may be compared with that of a human being. for the needle- women to lly lbs. 346 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION If, therefore, the same labourer has, day after day, to perform the same operation, there must be a different number of labourers for each operation; for instance, in type manufacture, there are four founders and two breakers to one rubber: the founder casts 2,000 type an hour, the breaker breaks up 4,000, and the rubber polishes 8,000. Here the landlords, in view of the increas- ing population, have destroyed about 20 per cent, of the exist- ing nouses. If labourers are driven away by the demolition of their old houses, they do not leave their old parish, or at most they settle down on its borders, as near as they can get to it. On the other hand, division of labour, which is the distinguishing principle of manu- facture, requires the isolation of the various stages of production and their independence of each other. For since, in this mode of production, the workman finds the instruments of labour existing independently of him as another man's property, economy in their use appears, with regard to him, to be a distinct operation, one that does not concern him, and which, therefore, has no con- nexion with the methods by which his own personal productiveness is increased. Only he exploits more wage-labour. Expressed in gold, the labour of five days is thirty shillings. . This increased expenditure demands a larger income. In its qualitative aspect, or formally considered, money has no bounds to its efficacy, i.e., it is the universal representative of material wealth, because it is directly convertible into any other commodity. At the dawn of civilisation, it is the first class that turns the scale; at a higher stage of development, it is the second. The price-form, however, is not only compatible with the possibility of a quantitative incongruity between magnitude of value and price, i.e., between the former and its expression in money, but it may also conceal a qualitative inconsistency, so much so, that, although money is nothing but the value-form of commodities, price ceases altogether to express value. Linguet overthrew Montes- quieu's illusory "Esprit des lois" with one word: "L'esprit des lois, c'est la propriete." 61Q CAPITALIST PRODUCTION property by various other means besides the exertion of labour. If then we leave out of consideration the use-value of com- modities, they have only one common property left, that of being products of labour. He, who before was the money-owner, now strides in front as capitalist; the possessor of labour-power follows as his labourer. And this form it possesses only in the shape of money. It never assumes this form when isolated, but only when placed in a value or exchange relation with another commodity of a different kind. On looking at her signature, however, in the school certificate books, I noticed that she spelt it in various ways, while her handwriting left no 1 L. And so the ball rolls on. His five senses also had to pay the penalty. by Robinson, ed. The majority of those who did not obtain milk were needle-women in London. £ o CO* CM CM CO* os o* CM TH vf C^ O CO SB ^H CO SS <~i£> COCO os CM t^ «rH o oooo 8 O S 8 CM O CM V? The only part of the so-called national wealth that actually enters into the collec- tive possessions of modern peoples is — their national debt. Mr. Broughton Charlton, county magistrate, declared, as chairman of a meeting held at the Assembly Rooms, Nottingham, on the 14th January, 1860, "that there was an amount of priva- tion and suffering among that portion of th« population con- nected with the lace trade, unknown in other parts of the king- dom, indeed, in the civilised world... I., p. According to the report of Mr. A. Such ma- chines as the modern hydraulic press, the modern power-loom, and the modern carding engine, could never have been furnished by Manufacture. So also is it with the means of production concentrated in buildings, furnaces, means of transport, &c. 6. Thus this fine lady appropriated 794,000 acres of land that had from time immemorial belonged to the clan. D., "The Ques- tion of the Necessity of the Existing Corn Laws Considered." London, 1816, p. The dissolution of the latter set free the elements of the former. The Expanded Relative form of value The value of a single commodity, the linen, for example, is now expressed in terms of numberless other elements of the world of commodities. This, however, is the delusion as well COMMODITIES 61 of the mercantilists and their recent revivers, Ferrier, Ganilh, l and others, as also of their antipodes, the modern bagmen of Free-trade, such as Bastiat. . 1530: Beggars old and unable to work receive a beggar's licence. In truth, Adam Smith breaks his investigation off, just where its difficulties begin. 1 Opening address to the Sanitary Conference, Birmingham, January 15th, 1875, by J. The separation of the intellectual powers of produc- tion from the manual labour, and the conversion of those powers into the might of capital over labour, is, as we have already shown, finally completed by modern industry erected on the foundation of machinery. The expropriation of the agricultural producer, of the peasant, from the soil, is the basis of the whole process. When we speak of capacity for labour, we do not abstract from the necessary means of subsistence. 758 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION "In the counties of Derbyshire, Nottinghamshire, and more particularly in Lancashire," says Fielden, "the newly- invented machinery was used in large factories built on the sides of streams capable of turning the water-wheel. ii., p. In the third part of Book II. Value, therefore, being the active factor in such a process, and assuming at one time the form of money, at another that of commodities, but through all these changes preserving itself and expanding, it requires some independent form, by means of which its identity may at any time be established. By means of advances, repayable in labour, which are handed down from generation to generation, not only the individual labourer, but his family, become, de facto, the prop- erty of other persons and their families. The bodily form of the commodity becomes its value-form. The capi- talist may even convert the additional capital into a machine that throws the producers of that capital out of work, and that replaces them by a few children. . of cot- ton into 10 lbs. In the time of Mirabeau, the lion of the Revolution, the great manufactories were still called manufactures reunies, workshops thrown into one, as we speak of fields thrown into one. Another expla- nation of the difference between tool and machine is that in the case of a tool, man is the motive power, while the motive power of a machine is something different from man, as is, for instance, an animal, water, wind, and so on. The £2 thus make four moves. The average intensity of labour changes from country to country; here it is greater, there less. For this the mechanism of capitalist production provides beforehand, by converting the working-class into a class dependent on wages, a class whose ordinary wages suffice, not only for its maintenance, but for its increase. Then comes again the time, when the supply of labour is less than the demand, wages rise, and so on. This circumstance formed a great hindrance to the establishment of steel-pen factories. The greater the social wealth, the functioning capital, the extent and energy of its growth, and, therefore, also the absolute mass of the proletariat and the productiveness of its labour, the greater is the industrial reserve army. It amounts to twelve shillings or the value of two days' work. 55.) CONTRADICTIONS IN THE FORMULA OF CAPITAL 163 and obtains from him in exchange corn to the value of £50. 2 James Anderson remarks in his polemic against Adam Smith: "It deserves, likewise, to be remarked, that although the apparent price of la- bour is usually lower in poor countries, where the produce of the soil, and grain in general, is cheap; yet it is in fact for the most part really higher than in other countries For it is not the wages that is given to the labourer per day that constitutes the real price of labour, although it is its apparent price. 4 1. On the other hand, the form of this movement precludes a circuit from being made by the money. An English manager of a cotton factory in Oldenburg, declares that the working-time there lasted from 5.30 a. Al- though a great deal of cleaning is constantly goingon day by day, yetSaturday is generally the day set apart for the thorough cleaning of the machinery, and a great deal of this is done while the machinery is in motion." Since cleaning is not paid for, the workpeople seek to get done with it as speedily as possible. The consumption of the labour-power, which was also the process of producing commodities, resulted in 20 lbs. The other CONSTANT CAPITAL AND VARIABLE CAPITAL 207 good, the capitalist is too much absorbed in money-grubbing to take notice of this gratuitous gift of labour. Let the mass of the surplus-value be S, the surplus-value supplied by the individual labourer in the average day s, the variable capital daily advanced in the purchase of one individual labour-power v, the sum total of the variable capital V, the val- ue of an average labour-power P, its degree of exploitation — / surp us- a our \ an j t ^ e number of labourers employed n; \ necessary labour/ r J we have: It is always supposed, not only that the value of an average labour-power is constant, but that the labourers employed by a capitalist are reduced to average labourers. 2. Parliament decreed that after March 1st, 1834, no child under 11, after March 1st, 1835, no child. 60 working-hours are left, 10 y for each of the first 5 days, 1-j for the last. These raw materials and means of subsistence have now become commodities; the large farmer sells them, he finds his market in manufactures. 1 Various detail labourers are employed in this first stage, as also in the final one of removing the bottles from the drying furnace, sorting and packing them, &c. They soon "cease ... This latter composition is determined by the relation between the mass of the means of production employed, on the one hand, and the mass of labour necessary for their employment on the other. ii., p. In the middle ages the contest ended with the ruin of the feudal pany, confirms the fact that in India silver ornaments still continue to per- form directly the functions of a hoard. Long before his time, the task was at- tempted with much better success by Gray, Bray, and others. 1808.) After some further crooked questions from these bourgeois, the secret of their "sympathy" for widows, poor families, &c, comes out at last, "The coal proprietor appoints certain gentlemen to take the oversight of the workings, and it is their policy, in order to receive approbation, to place things on the most economical basis they can, and these girls are employed at from Is. up to Is. 6d. A great deal of capital, which appears to-day in the United States without any certificate of birth, was yesterday, in England, the capitalised blood of children. Every augmentation, therefore, in the national stock destined for reproduction, comes, in the progress of society, to have less and less influence upon the condtition of the labourer." (Ramsay, 1. i. x Since the surplus-labour is only an aliquot part of the working-day, or since surplus-value is only an aliquot part of the value created, the surplus-labour must necessarily be always less than the working- day, or the surplus-value always less than the total value created. Tools of the same kind, such as knives, drills, gimlets, hammers, &c, may be employed in different processes; and the same tool may serve va- rious purposes in a single process. 3 1. in har- vest, 2 drivers, 2 loaders, 2 pitchers, 2 rakers, and the rest at the rick, or in the barn, will despatch double the work that the same number of hands would do if divided into different gangs on different farms." ("An Inquiry into the Connexion between the Present Price of Provisions and the Size of Farms." By a Farmer. The value of the product is exactly equal to the value of the capital advanced. In this case he produces no surplus-value for the buyer of his labour, the 6s. And now Hussey Vivian (himself an exploiter of mines) asks: "Would not the opinion of the workman depend upon the poverty of the workman's family?" Mr. Bruce: "Do you not think it would be a very hard case, where a parent had been injured, or where he was sickly, or where a father was dead, and there was only a mother, to prevent a child between 12 and 14 earning Is. 7d. 321. 17. 8 I. per. They are then engaged all day long, up to 4, 5, 6, and as late as 7 o'clock in the evening carrying out bread, or sometimes in the afternoon in the bakehouse again, assisting in the biscuit- baking. An artificer, who performs one after another the various frac- tional operations in the production of a finished article, must at one time change his place, at another his tools. The Act of 1833 declares the ordinary factory working-day to be from half-past five in the morning to half-past eight in the evening, and within these limits, a period of 15 hours, it is law- ful to employ young persons (i.e., persons between 13 and 18 years of age), at any time of the day, provided no one individual young person should work more than 12 hours in any one day, except in certain cases especially provided for. 168, 169.) The "difficulte"— it exists for him, mt for Ricardo— that Say means to clear up is this: Why does not the exchange-value of the use-values increase, when their quantity increases in consequence of in- creased productive power of labour? In Manufacture, the organisation of the social labour-process is purely subjective; it is a combination of detail labourers; in its machinery system, Modern Industry has a productive organism that is purely objective, in which the labourer becomes a mere appendage to an already existing material condition of produc- tion. The money-form attaches itself either to the most important articles of exchange from outside, and these in fact are primitive and natural forms in which the exchange- value of home products finds expression; or else it attaches itself to the object of utility that forms, like cattle, the chief portion of indigenous alienable wealth. 3 With the changing productiveness of labour the same quan- tum of product represents a varying working-time. This boundary may, at any given period, be attained in the actual extent of economic time employed." ("An Essay on the Political Economy of Nations." London, 1821, pp. That for master bakers to induce their workmen, by the fear of losing employment, to violate their religious con- victions and their better feelings, to disobey the laws of the land, and to disregard public opinion (this all refers to Sunday labour), is calculated to provoke ill-feeling between workmen and masters, . Hence "they sometimes have long distances to go to and from work, often get wet, and suffer much hardship, not unfrequently ending in sickness, disease and want." 3 1 1. Thus the nation has been abused, and made to pay for the twisting of straw for asses to eat. Even in the middle of the eight- eenth century, the Rev. x A service is nothing more than the useful effect of a use-value, be it of a commodity, or be it of labour. His labour is now six times as effective as it was, for the purposes of useful production. is nothing unless it is sold." 2 1 Rossi. 281: "And thinking itself, in this age of separations, may become a peculiar craft." DIVISION OP LABOUR AND MANUFACTURE 363 nounced and decided in proportion as society (he rightly uses this word, for capital, landed property and their State) becomes richer. "Previous to the famine, the labourer enjoyed his cabin .... of Pol. The seller therefore pockets a surplus-value of 10. Given, on the other hand, the price of labour, the daily or weekly wages depend on the quantity of the daily or weekly labour. c, p. A distribution of this portion amongst them is consequently necessary. He finds but one answer: security! "Thanks to the advance of industry and science," says Sismondi, "every labourer can produce every day much more than his consumption requires. If, then, as we have already seen, there can be no change of absolute magnitude in the value of labour-power, and in surplus-value, unaccompanied by a change in their rela- tive magnitudes, so now it follows that no change in their relative magnitudes is possible, without a previous change in the absolute magnitude of the value of labour-power. * This law which, by means of State compulsion, confined the struggle between capital and labour within limits comfortable for capital, has outlived revolutions and changes of dynasties. Thus the series of paraffins: c n H 2n-f2 > that of the norma i alcohols: C n H 2n+2 0; of the normal fatty acids: C n H 2n O 2 and many others. Commodities find their own value already completely represented, without any initiative on their part, in another commodity existing in company with them. 2 In all countries of Europe, 1 "The petty proprietors who cultivated their own fields with their own hands, and enjoyed a modest competence.... This "liberalism," so full of consideration for "capital," was the more noteworthy as, Dr. Farre, Sir A. Legisla- tion was, therefore, compelled to gradually get rid of its ex- ceptional character, or where, as in England, it proceeds after the manner of the Roman Casuists, to declare any house in which work was done to be a factory. The expression of the value of commodity A in terms of any other commodity B, merely distinguishes the value from the use-value of A, and therefore places A merely in a relation of exchange with a single different commodity, B; but it is still far from expressing A's qualitative equality, and quantitative proportionality, to all commodities. On account of the high wages, says his disciple, Merivale, there is in the colonies "the urgent desire for cheaper and more subservient labourers — for a class to whom the capi- talist might dictate terms, instead of being dictated to by them ... of yarn, or in 1 2 2 hour 1-x- lbs.; consequently he produces in 8 hours 13 -~- lbs., or a partial product equal in value to all the cotton that is spun in a whole day. The prices, or quantities of gold, into which the values of commodities are ideally changed, are therefore now expressed in the names of coins, or in the legally valid names of the sub- divisions of the gold standard. Here we hesitate. It begins with the revolt of the Netherlands from Spain, assumes giant dimensions in England's Anti-Jacobin War, and is still going on in the opium wars against China, &c. 7.) This passage refers to the time before the Licinian rogations. By a Well-wisher of Mankind. 2 "My knowledge of such evils," says Dr. Simon, the medical officer of the Privy Council and editor in chief of the Reports on Public Health, "may excuse the profound misgiving with which I regard any large industrial employment of adult women." 3 "Hap- py indeed," exclaims Mr. Baker, the factory inspector, in his official report, "happy indeed will it be for the manufacturing districts of England, when every married woman having a family is prohibited from working in any textile works at all." 4 The moral degradation caused by the capitalistic exploita- tion of women and children has been so exhaustively depicted by F. As a rule, the exploiter of a mine, whether its owner or his tenant, builds a number of cottages for his hands. c, pp 41-42. The trick has at last succeeded; money has been converted into capital. Lastly, the average of these averages, in all branches of pro- THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 613 duction, gives us the composition of the total social capital of a country, and with this alone are we, in the last resort, concerned in the following investigation. The capital G is made up of two components, one, the sum of money c laid out upon the means of production, and the oth- er, the sum of money v expended upon the labour-power; c rep- resents the portion that has become constant capital, and v the portion that has become variable capital. On the basis of capitalist production, however, this necessary labour can form a part only of the working-day; the working-day itself can never be reduced to this minimum. Every product of labour is, in all states of society, a use- value; but it is only at a definite historical epoch in a society's development that such a product becomes a commodity, viz., at the epoch when the labour spent on the production of a useful article becomes expressed as one of the objective qualities of that article, i.e., as its value. c, note 2.) e The details given at the end of Part IV. The concluding part of the report is as follows: — "The Committee has carefully examined his proposal and finds that it is entirely in favour of the merchants, and that no advantage will result to the crown." ("Arbeiten der Kaiserlich Russischen Gesandtschaft zu Peking iiber China." Aus dem Russischen von Dr. K Abel und F. Piece-wages do not, in fact dis- tinctly express any relation of value. For instance, Ricardo declares that he agrees with Destutt de Tracy in this proposition: "As it is certain that our physical and moral facul- ties are alone our original riches, the employment of those faculties, labour of some kind, is our only original treasure, and it is always from this employ- ment that all those things are created, which we call riches.... 17, as follows: That the produce of land increases, cseteris paribus, in a diminishing ratio to the increase of the labourers em- ployed' (Mill here introduces in an erroneous form the law enunciated by Ri- cardo's school, for since the 'decrease of the labourers employed,' kept even pace in England with the advance of agriculture, the law discovered in, and applied to, England, could have no application to that country, at all events), 'is the universal law of agricultural industry.' This is very remarkable, since Mill was ignorant of the reason for this law." (Liebig, 1. owe their superior advantages by no means to any superior abilities of their own, but almost entirely ... Transformation of arable land into also a co-possessor of the common land. There we meet with the fol- lowing derivative formulae. 20. "Increased demand on the part of the labourers means nothing more than their willingness to take less of their own product for themselves, and leave a greater part of it to their employers; and if it be said, that this begets glut, by lessening consumption" (on the part of the labourers), "I can only reply that glut is synonymous with large profits." 2 The learned disputation, how the booty pumped out of the labourer may be divided, with most advantage to accumulation, between the industrial capitalist and the rich idler, was hushed in face of the revolution of July. and 9 p. The great beauty of capitalist production consists in this— that it not only constantly reproduces the wage-worker as wage- worker, but produces always, in proportion to the accumulation of capital, a relative surplus-population of wage-workers. Hence its Fetish character is comparatively easy to be seen through. But this much is clear; a scien- tific .analysis of competition is not possible, before we have a con- ception of the inner nature of capital, just as the apparent motions of the heavenly bodies are not intelligible to any but him, who is acquainted with their real motions, motions which are not direct- ly perceptible by the senses. A question that could only have been proposed, because Peel was as much in the dark as to the nature of money as the "little shilling men" of Birmingham. ix., n. i., London, 1836, p. 1 The contests about wages in Manufacture, pre-suppose manu- facture, and are in no sense directed against its existence. 2 "An Essay on Trade and Commerce," Lond., 1770, p. Since A B is constant, the ratio of BCto A B can always be calculated. 21, 22.) One orthodox individual, amongst Adam Smith's college friends, writes after his death: "Smith's well-placed affection for Hume ... "The agricultural labourers' huts," an inspector cries out, "are a disgrace to the Christianity and to the civilisation of this country." 1 In order to increase the attractions of these holes for the labourers, the pieces of land belonging thereto from time immemorial, are systematically confiscated. 1 3 families Rifle Court Marygate, No. 11 . But if, in consequence of increased pro- ductiveness, the value of the necessaries of life fall, and the value of a day's labour-power be thereby reduced from five shillings to three, the surplus-value increases from one shilling to three. And how do we measure the quantity of this value? Consequently, we should have 20 yards of linen = l A coat. We are doing with fewer hands by 14, at a saving in wages of £10 a-week. 288,916 No. 176,368 Acres. This general result is treated, here, as if it were the immediate result directly aimed at in each individual case. The reduction of the working-day to 12 hours dates in Eng- land from 1832. We cling to the fact theoretically, as he does practically. c, p. MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 463 bourhood, there are employed, mostly in very heavy work, 30,000 children and young persons, besides 10,000 women. It is only by being exchanged that the products of labour acquire, as values, one uniform social status, distinct from their varied forms of existence as objects of utility. 1860.-59,166,616 lbs. The process disappears in the product; the latter is a use-value, Nature's material adapted by a change of form to the wants of man. The product ceases to be the direct product of the individual, and becomes a social product, pro- duced in common by a collective labourer, i.e., by a combination of workmen, each of whom takes only a part, greater or less, in the manipulation of the subject of their labour. Report.," p. The smaller capitals, therefore, crowd into spheres of production which Modern Industry has only sporadically or incompletely got hold of. 34. Every change in the amount of the equivalent that he receives appears to him, therefore, necessarily as a change in the value or price of his 12 hours' work. the supplies of wages and shelter are not cal- culated on the profit to be derived from him. 1 * This sentence has been added to the English text in conformity with the 4th German edition. Property, because each disposes only of what is his own. If the day be lengthened by 2 hours, i.e., from 12 hours to 14, the surplus-labour remains at 6 hours, the surplus-value at 3 shillings, but the surplus-value decreases compared with the value of labour-power, as measured by the necessary labour-time. 132 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION gold one can even get souls into Paradise." (Columbus in his letter from Jamaica, 1503.) Since gold does not disclose what has been transformed into it, everything, commodity or not, is convertible into gold. II n'est done pas un moyen de s'enrichir, puisque Ton donne autant que Ton recoit." (Le Trosne, 1. At this stage, therefore, the articles exchanged do not acquire a value-form independent of their own use-value, or of the individ- ual needs of the exchangers. That this is a well understood system is plain . About 25 years ago the ratio expressing the relative value of gold and silver was 15-|-:1; now it is approximately 22:1, and silver is still constantly falling as against gold. A, therefore, may get, for the same exchange-value, more corn, and B more wine, than each would respectively get without any exchange by pro- ducing his own corn and wine. noob<i ctvTa|i6et(S ea&ou 7idvTa, cprpiv o'Hpax/.eitoi;, xai nop dnavrwv, uio7iep ipuaoo ip-i]\ia-:a xal xp^jJtitcov ypoao?'. But, in that case, its expression in an infinite series is ever incomplete and deficient in unity. vii.) "The want of regularity in coming to work, encouraged by the possibility and practice of making up for this by working longer hours "(1. The temperature is probably from 86° to 90° At the forges and in the rolling-mills the hands work night and day, in relays, but all the other parts of the work are day-work, i.e., from 6 a. 129.) 2 "Rep. 456. But the worker has received payment for the exchange-value of his labour-power and by so doing has ali- enated its use-value — this being the case in every sale and purchase. "The time shall be reg- ulated by a public clock," for example, the nearest railway clock, by which the factory clock is to be set. xix., n. "Why," cries Mirabeau, "why go so far to seek the cause of the manufacturing glory of Saxony before the war? One woman or one girl superintends four such machines, and so pro- duces near upor 600,000 needles in a day, and upwards of 3,000,000 in a week. No boots can be made without leather. As co-operation extends its scale, this despotism takes forms peculiar to itself. In "A Letter toA. . The proof is easily given, i "Rept. One may thus gauge the utopianism of the bimetallist idea that compulsory international quotation will raise silver again to the old value ratio of 1:15-^-. not in propor- tion to the accumulation of the general capital.... The labourer, with his wife and child and chattels, is thrown out into the street, and — if he crowds in too large numbers towards quartern of the town where the vestries insist on decency, he is prosecuted in the name of sanitation! Except London, there was at the beginning of the 19th centu- ry no single town in England of 100,000 inhabitants. For instance the cattle-breeder produces hides, the tanner makes the hides into leather, and the shoemaker, the leather into boots. As soon as magnitude of value is converted into price, the above necessary relation takes the shape of a more or less accidental exchange-ratio between a single commodity and another, the money-commodity. Suppose, for example, that in the old mode of production, a capital of £500 is employed weekly, two-fifths being constant and three-fifths variable capital, i.e., £200 being laid out in means of production, and £300, say £1 per man, in labour-power. An abstract law of population exists for plants and animals only, and only in so far as man has not interfered with them. Here and there one man gets a living by sewing, another by cutting out shoes; one does nothing but cut out clothes, another nothing but sew the pieces to- gether. 4 Robert Owen, soon after 1810, not only maintained the necessity of a limitation of the working-day in theory, but actually introduced the 10 hours' day into his factory at New Lanark. Hence wage-labourers cannot co- operate, unless they are employed simultaneously by the same cap- ital, the same capitalist, and unless therefore their labour-powers are bought simultaneously by him. Since the value in which a day's labour is embodied, increases with the length of that day, it is evident that the surplus-value and the price of labour-power may simultaneously increase, ei- ther by equal or unequal quantities. Instead of converting surplus-value into capital, he, on the contrary, by the purchase of those commodities and that labour, consumes or expends it as revenue. As the value of the raw material may change, so, too, may that of the instruments of labour, of the machinery, &c, em- ployed in the process; and consequently that portion of the value of the product transferred to it from them, may also change. The values of these commodities are, therefore, changed in imagination into so many different quantities of gold. (1. 21, 1860. Lord Dufferin demands a new blood-letting of one-third of a million only, instead of about two millions; in fact, without the getting rid of these, the millennium in Erin is not to be. M. Though the latter with a por- tion of that tribute purchases the additional labour-power even at its full price, so that equivalent is exchanged for equivalent, yet the transaction is for all that only the old dodge of every con- queror who buys commodities from the conquered with the money he has robbed them of. but ... It is not their practice to deliver bread from house to house. ("Reports of Insp. But it is different as soon as we deal with the process of production from the point of view of the process of creation of surplus- value. This control appears, therefore, during the first half of the nineteenth century simply as exceptional legislation. Moreover, however much the individual manufacturer might give the rein to his old lust for gain, the spokesmen and political leaders of the manufacturing class ordered a change of front and of speech towards the workpeople. -Col. E.] 2 "Census, &c," 1. a cheaper workman." (Ure, 1. But both these limiting conditions are of a very elastic nature, and allow the greatest latitude. Apart from the working-class movement that daily grew more threatening, the limiting of factory labour was dictated by the same necessity which spread guano over the English fields. Although the absolute increase of the English population in the last half century was very great, the relative increase or rate of growth fell constantly, as the following table borrowed from the census shows. 15, 16.) Compare Quetelet on the average individual. 129,106,753 lbs. Therefore, the larger capi- tals beat the smaller. It does not, there- fore, change immediately the mode of production. of cotton. c, p. According to this, the surplus- labour of the English agricultural labourer is to his necessary labour as 3 : 1, which gives a rate of exploitation of 300%. This course constitutes its currency (cours de la monnaie). But the place occupied by these branches in the general production is, even in the most developed countries, far from important. 8 The whole history of the development of machinery can be traced in the history of the corn mill. The favourite method of treating the working-day as con- stant in magnitude became, through the use of the formulae II., a fixed usage, because in them surplus-labour is always compared with a working-day of given length. But the coasting trade of India and between the islands, as well as the internal trade of India, were the monopoly of the higher employes of the company. The exiles transplanted to the United States, send home sums of money every year as travelling expenses for those left behind. We have now to consider the influence of such changes on the quantitative aspect of the relative expression of value. On their own authority they transformed their nominal right into a right of private prop- erty, and as this brought them into collision with their clansmen, resolved to drive them out by open force. Now there are 28 towns with more than 50,000 inhabitants. It was "in almost exclusive possession of the East Indian trade and the commerce between the south-east and north- west of Europe. I get 3 shillings and sixpence. x Finally, some one may ask why gold is capable of being replaced by tokens that have no value? The demand for wage-labour grew, therefore, rapidly with every accumulation of capital, whilst the supply of wage-labour followed but slowly. m. Definite historical conditions are nee essary that a product may become a commodity. unimportant source of accumulation, compared with wages and rents, in the earlier stages of society... directly or indirectly securing to himself the profit on a man employed at 10s. It is therefore impossible for capital to be produced by cir- culation, and it is equally impossible for it to originate apart 1 Aristotle, 1. Let us take his work: "Budgets economiques des classes ouvrieres de la Bel- gique," Bruxelles, 1855. The state of things described as incidental to lace finishing is here repeated, save that instead of the "mistresses' houses," we find what are called "lace-schools," kept by poor women in their cot- tages. Nothing is more characteristic than the pretext for this bourgeois coup d'etat. 1 Thus we may say that surplus-value rests on a natural basis;, but this is permissible only in the very general sense, that there is no natural obstacle absolutely preventing one man from dis- burdening himself of the labour requisite for his own existence,, and burdening another with it, any more, for instance, than unconquerable natural obstacles prevent one man from eating 1 "The very existence o\ the master-capitalists, as a distinct class, is dependent on the productiveness of industry." (Ramsay, 1. But the process goes beyond this phase. By the side of independent pro- ducers who carry on their handicrafts and agriculture in the tradi- tional old-fashioned way, there stands the usurer or the merchant, with his usurer's capital or merchant's capital, feeding on them like a parasite. c, p 104.) 3 [n this sense Necker speaks of the "objets de faste et de somptuosite," of which "le temps a grossi ('accumulation," and which "les lois de propri- ety out [assembles dans une seuleclasse de la societe." (CEuvres de M. 1 But more especially, the revolution in the modes of production of industry and agriculture made necessary a revolution in the general conditions of the social process of production, i.e., in the means of communication and of transport. If instead of working for the capitalist, he worked independently on his own account, he would, other things being equal, still be obliged to labour for the same number of hours, in order to produce the val- ue of his labour-power, and thereby to gain the means of sub- sistence necessary for his conservation or continued reproduction. Brief von Rodbertus.) To such ideo- logical commonplaces did the bold attack by Rodbertus in his "social let- ters" finally dwindle down.—/ 1 . Wakefield.) 2 See "Public Health. xi, p. 172 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION perpetuates himself, by procreation." 1 The labour-power with- drawn from the market by wear and tear and death, must be continually replaced by, at the very least, an equal amount of fresh labour-power. c, Appendix, p. they have complained of over-work, and it is greatly to be regretted that the clear intention of the legislature should have failed by reason of a faulty definition." (1. a daily surplus-value of nx3s. 1817, pp. "Is it (the Act) required more against the masters or against the parents?" "It is required against both I think." "You cannot say whether it is required' against one more than against the other?" "No; I can hardly answer that question." (ns. On the still worse condition in metal mines, see the very conscientious Report of the Royal Commission of 1864. 135.) The system of "open" and "closed" villages obtains in all the Midland counties and throughout the East of England. Econ., Partic- ularly Relating to Value," p. Modern Domestic Industry I now come to the so-called domestic industry. H. Come damned earth, Thou common whore of mankind." (Shakespeare: Timon of Athens.) 3 "Oo5sv ydp avOpcmroiaiv otv ap*ft>po<; Kaxov voptiajia tfUaate- touto xai n6Xgt<; IIopQel, x68' avopa<; eSavtaTTjaiv 66[ia>v. Taking the exchange of commodities as our basis, our first assumption was that capitalist and labourer met as free persons, as independent owners of commodities; the one pos- sessing money and means of production, the other labour-power. 122, 739, 1747). . Given a machine's capacity for work, that is, the number of its operating tools, or, where it is a question of force, their mass, the amount of its product will depend on the velocity of its work- ing parts, on the speed, for instance, of the spindles, or on the num- ber of blows given by the hammer in a minute. is commonly represented as a highly improved county ... But the labour-time necessary for the production of 20 yards of linen or 1 coat varies with every change in the productiveness of weaving or tailoring. The Pha- risee of a capitalist represented by one of his servants, accompanies this action, of course, with the unctuous phrase: "That's for mother," yet he knows well enough that the poor children must sit up and help. 1 Let the necessary labour-time amount to 10 hours, the val- ue of a day's labour-power to five shillings, the surplus labour- time to 2 hours, and the daily surplus-value to one shilling. . "The Principles of Pol. 39, n 58.) "If one man performs the work of two. No friend to Ireland can wish the war to be prolonged [between the landlords and the small Celtic farmers] — still less, that it should end by the victory of the tenants. 47.) "Capital (in factories) can never be employed in keeping the machinery in motion beyond a limited time, without certain injury to the health and morals of the labourers employed; and they are not in a position to protect themselves." (1. the lessee acts as if the whole colony were encamped, not resident." 1 "In pursuance of my instructions," says Dr. Stevens, "I vis- ited most of the large colliery villages in the Durham Union. They count merely as depositories of so much absorbed or materialised labour; that labour, whether previously embodied in the means of production, or incorporated in them for the first time during the process by the action of labour-power, counts in either case only according to its duration; it amounts to so many hours or days as the case may be. a-week, 14 feet 6 inches long, 7 feet broad, kitchen, 6 feet high, the bedroom without window, fire-place, door, or opening, except into the lobby; no garden. Some of these workmen were independent handi- craftsmen of various trades, others were grouped together in manu- factures, in which, as before-mentioned, division of labour was strictly carried out. This is evident, since their taking the form of commodities implies their differentiation into commodi- ties and money. 2 1 Harrison in his "Description of England," says "although peradven- ture foure pounds of old rent be improved to fortie, toward the end of his term, if he have not six or seven yeares rent lieng by him, fiftie or a hundred pounds, yet will the farmer thinke his gaines verie small." 2 On the influence of the depreciation of money in the 16th century, on the different classes of society, see "A Compendious or Briefe Examina- tion of Certayne Ordinary Complaints of Divers of our Countrymen in these our Days." By W. (3) Farms over 5, not over 15 acres. These farms were fiefs, sub-fiefs, &.C, according to the value and extent of the domains, many of them only containing a few acres. V. But take the figures as they stand; we then have for England and Wales alone, according to the census of 1861, a total of 1,024,277 persons, about as many as are absorbed by agricul- ture and cattle breeding. c, p. ." to "Nassau W. weekly with 4 adults and 4 children, had nothing good about it, except the walls, from the floor of rough-hewn pieces of stones to the roof of worn-out thatch. Sect. For instance, if a flock of sheep has to be shorn, or a field of wheat to be cut and harvested, the quantity and qual- ity of the product depends on the work being begun and ended within a certain time. c, p. The clearance and dispersion of the people is pursued by the proprietors as a settled principle, as an agricultural necessity, just as trees and brushwood are cleared from the wastes of America or Australia; and the oper- ation goes on in a quiet, business-like way, &c." 2 1 The deer-forests of Scotland contain not a single tree. "If," says Harrison, "the old records of euerie manour be sought ... .It forgets that the latter not only is the direct antithesis of the former, but absolutely grows on its tomb only. I have onTy half an hour sometimes; on Thursday, Friday, and Saturday." 1 Dr. Greenhow states that the average duration of life in the pottery districts of Stoke-on-Trent, and Wolstanton is ex- traordinarily short. 314 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION obtained only by lowering the wages of the labourer below the val- ue of his labour-power. . Ac- cording to Mr. Baynes, 2|- operatives are required for the 450 mule spindles, inclusive of preparation machinery, x that are driven by one-horse power; each self-acting mule spindle, working ten hours, produces 13 ounces of yarn (average number of thick- ness); consequently 2-f- operatives spin weekly 365 f- lbs. If the quantitative extension induces qualitative change, then the rate of profit on the larger capital rises simultaneously." — F. A spider conducts operations that resemble those of a weaver, and a bee puts to shame many an architect in the construction of her cells. 4 From a social point of view, therefore, the working-class, even when not directly engaged in the labour-process, is just as much an appendage of capital as the ordinary instruments of labour. Only by lowering the price of labour-power below its value could the capitalist save himself harmless. Why? . Harrison, in his "Descrip- tion of England, prefixed to Holinshed's Chronicles," describes how the expropriation of small peasants is ruining the country. Mr. L. "Of those who share the national income among themselves, the one side (the workers) acquire every year a fresh right to their share by fresh work; the others (the capitalists) have already acquired, by work done orig- inally, a permanent right to their share" (Sismondi, I. . says: "It would be unjust to the larger employers that their factories should be placed under regulation, while the hours of labour in the smaller places in their own branch of business were under no legislative restriction. Even where their primary concern has been only with the injury to health, often almost perforce they have referred to other relations on the subject. c, pp. The following list gives the wages paid in three villages in the neighbourhood of Blanford, Wim- bourne, and Poole. We will assume that the two gold pieces, in considera- tion of which our weaver has parted with his linen, are the meta- morphosed shape of a quarter of wheat. It is, e.g., for that arising from prof- its between 1853 to 1857, 1.73% yearly; 1857-1861, 2.74%, and for 1861-64, 9.30% yearly. If any of the poor perish under the contractor's care, the sin will lie at his door, as the parish will have done its duty by them. En quoi 1'effet d'une machine differe-t-il de celui de nouveaux habitants?" (French trans, t. La- bour has incorporated itself with its subject: the former is mate- rialised, the latter transformed. 1647.) "Some of them (the boys) cannot read and write at all, I suppose?" "The majority cannot. 2 1. . But no one is forthwith bound to purchase, because he has just sold. We see here, on the one hand, how the exchange of commodi- ties breaks through all local and personal bounds inseparable from direct barter, and develops the circulation of the products of social labour; and on the other hand, how it develops a whole network of social relations spontaneous in their growth and entire- ly beyond the control of the actors. These re- gisseurs themselves were sometimes noblemen. 54.) 2 Eden should have asked, whose creatures then are "the civil insti- tutions"? Empl. So far therefore as the cir- culation of commodities effects a change in the form alone of their values, and is free from disturbing influences, it must be the exchange of equivalents. . A lamentation on this score was heard in England during the whole of the fifteenth, and the first half of the eighteenth centuries. Twelve hours' labour are exchanged against 10, 6, &c, hours' labour. These are made up in the same way as the common gang, but count fewer members, and work, not under a gang-master, but under some old farm servant, whom the farmer does not know how to employ in any better way. J. of Pol. 191) is compensated by the fact that among the rest many Bibles and religious books are bound by them. 74-76. The compulsory regulation of the working-day as regards its length, pauses, beginning and end, the system of relays of children, the exclusion of all children under a certain age, &c, necessitate on the one hand more machinery 4 and the sub- 1 I. Whatever be the proportion of surplus-value which the industrial capitalist retains for himself, or yields up to others, he is the one who, in the first instance, appropriates it. "I metalli ... . 434.) HISTORICAL TENDENCY OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 763 its own feet, then the further socialisation of labour and further transformation of the land and other means of production into socially exploited and, therefore, common means of production, as well as the further expropriation of private proprietors, takes a new form. Intel- ligence in production expands in one direction, because it van- ishes in many others. No wonder that explosions have increased progressively, both in number and extent (sometimes with a loss of 200-300 men), during the last MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 503 ten years. With such rubbish has the brave fellow, with his motto, "nulla dies sine linea," piled up mountains of books. In most of the Prussian provinces, Frederick II. That the relative sur- plus-population is to-day as great as before 1846; that wages are just as low, that the oppression of the labourers has increased, that misery is forcing the country towards a new crisis. In the open village, cottage-speculators buy scraps of land, which they throng as densely as they can with the cheap- est of all possible hovels. of Java: "The History of Java." Lond., 1817, Vol. In 1866 a reduction in wages of 5 per cent, took place amongst the cotton opera- tives. The orthodox Parliament will hear nothing of Sabbath-breaking if it occurs in the process of expanding capital. 3 This is the secret both of the pros- perity of the colonies and of their inveterate vice — opposition to the establishment of capital. 1 "Report, &c, Relative to the Grievances Complained of by the Jour- neymen Bakers." Lond. In consequence of this defect, small-pox has been raging for some time, and some deaths [amongst the troglodytes] have been caused by it. The factory inspectors soon found out by ques- tioning the schoolmasters, that the factory children, although receiving only one half the education of the regular day schol- ars, yet learnt quite as much and often more. 1. A real machinery system, however, does not take the place of these independent machines, until the subject of labour goes through a connected series of detail processes, that are carried out by a chain of machines of various kinds, the one supple- menting the other. With this the demand for labour fell, not only relatively, but absolutely. 242 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION have been so employed if sufficient time had been set apart spe- cially for cleaning, &c, either before 6 a. Smith recommends education of the people by the State, but prudently, and in homoeopathic doses. Blanqui: "Cours d'Econ Industrielle" Recueilli par A Blaise Paris, 1838-39, p 79.) Since Blanqui wrote this, the vari- ous independent labourers have, to some extent, been united in factories. Since the standard of money is on the one hand purely conventional, and must on the other hand find general accept- ance, it is in the end regulated by law. and.... 51-52.) We shall, in a later chapter, see how our friends, the manufacturers, endeavoured, during the catastrophe in the cotton trade, to prevent by every means, including State interference, the emigration of the operatives. 2 Sismondi's analysis of accumulation suffers from the great defect, that he contents himself, to too great an extent, with the phrase "conversion of revenue into capital," without" fathoming the material conditions of this operation. 464 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION hours, often longer, than the adults. Altogether, irrespective of the case of a rise of wages with a fall- ing price of labour, &c, such an increase only means at best a quantitative diminution of the unpaid labour that the worker has to supply. The German "Wert- sein," to be worth, for instance, expresses in a less striking man- ner than the Romance verbs "valere," "valer," "valoir," that the equating of commodity B to commodity A, is commodity A's own mode of expressing its value. 2 In our reflecting and reasoning age a man is not worth much who cannot give a good reason for everything, no matter hpw bad or how crazy. It is the necessity of bringing a natural force under the control of society, of economising, of appropriating or subduing it on a large scale by the work of man's hand, that first plays the decisive part in the history of industry. 3 "What a progress," since 1770! Macaulay would shout with exultation! The "House of Terror" for paupers of which the capitalistic soul of 1770 only dreamed, was realised a few years later in the shape of a gigantic "Workhouse" for the industrial worker him- self. In the 17th century attempts had already been made to turn two pairs of millstones with a single water-wheel. One of the essential conditions for the existence of the fac- tory system, especially when the length of the working-day is fixed, is certainty in the result, i.e., the production in a given time of a given quantity of commodities, or of a given useful effect. It was erroneously thought that the giving of reckoning names to definite weights of gold, is the same thing as fixing the value of those weights." (Karl Marx, 1. If the labourer is row employed less than 12 hours (or less than 6 days in the week), e.g., only 6 or 8 hours, he receives, with this price of labour, only 2s. Lastly, and for this purpose our friend has a penal code of his own, all wasteful consumption of raw material or instruments of labour is strictly forbidden, because what is so wasted, repre- sents labour superfluously expended, labour that does not count in the product or enter into its value. Among them are a number of items that do not concern us here, such as rent, rates, and taxes, insurance, salaries of the manager, book-keeper, engineer, and others. 31, 1863,'* p. These imagi- nary expressions, arise, however, from the relations of production themselves. 20. The 10,000 spindles, including preparation-machinery, and motive power, cost, we will assume, £1 per spindle, amounting to a total of £10,000. 2 Alum finely powdered, or mixed with salt, is a normal article of com- merce bearing the significant name of "bakers' stuff." 3 Soot is a well-known and very energetic form of carbon, and forms a manure that capitalistic chimney-sweeps sell to English farmers. Many of these cottages are models of untidi- ness, dirt, and dust. The value of this product includes: first, the value of the used- up means of production. c. "Cette facon d'imputer a une seule chose la valeur de plusieurs autres" (par exemple au lin la consom- mation du tisserand), "d'appliquer, pour ainsi dire, couche sur couche, plu- sieurs valeurs sur une seule, fait que celle-ci grossit d'autant.... Of this 4 lbs. 582 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION for the moment, whether the additional capital is joined on to the original capital, or is separated from it to function independently; whether the same capitalist, who accumulated it, employs it, or whether he hands it over to another. A very good portrait of this Edmund Burke, during his liberal time, is to be found in the writings of the Rev. B. to 8— p. It was in fact by the cheapness of the human sweat and the human blood, which were converted into commodities, that the markets were constantly being extended, and continue daily to be extend- ed; more especially was this the case with England's colonial markets, where, besides, English tastes and habits prevail. 441, p. This division of labour, like every other, is an effect of past, and a cause of future progress . The two metamorphoses constituting the circuit are at the same time two inverse partial metamorphoses of two other com- modities. surplus-value. . THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 623 This diminution in the variable part of capital as compared with the constant, or the altered value-composition of the capital, however, only shows approximately the change in the composi- tion of its material constituents. 1 It seemed, however, doubtful whether this effect was pro- duced in the factory proper, where the dependence of the workman on the continuous and uniform motion of the machinery had al- ready created the strictest discipline. 698 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION Table A LIVE STOCK Year Horses Cattle Total Number Decrease Total Number Decrease Increase 1860 1861 1862 1863 1864 1865- 619,811 614,232 602,894 579,978 562,158 547,867 5,993 11,338 22,916 17,820 14,291 3,606,374 3,471,688 3,254,890 3,144,231 3,262,294 3,493,414 138,316 216,798 110,695 118,063 231,120 Year Sheep Pigs Total Number Decrease Increase Total Number Decrease Increase 1860 1861 1862 1863 1864 1865 3,542,080 3,556,050 3,456,132 3,308,204 3,366,941 3,688,742 99,918 147,982 13,970 58,737 321,801 1,271,072 1,102,042 1,154,324 1,067,458 1,058,480 1,299,893 169,030 86,866 8,978 52,282 241,413 The decrease of the population was naturally accompanied by a decrease in the mass of products. If here and there one of the lowest class by uncommon industry, and pinching his belly, lifts himself above the condition he was brought up in, nobody ought to hinder him; nay, it is undeniably the wisest course for every person in the society, and for every private family to be frugal; but it is the interest of all rich na- tions, that the greatest part of the poor should almost never be idle, and yet continually spend what they get . Just as little does it concern us, 1 We here take no account of export trade, by means of which a nation can change articles of luxury either into means of production or means of subsistence, and vice versa. In the same proportion as these instruments of labour serve as product-formers without adding value to the product, i.e., in the same proportion as they are wholly employed but only partly consumed, they perform, as we saw earlier, the same gratuitous service as the natural forces, water, steam, air, electricity, etc. Wakefield: "A View of the Art of Colonisation." London, 1849, p. But besides this, at a certain stage of its development, Modern Industry became technologically incompatible with the basis furnished for it by handicraft and Manufacture. — The latest English and American "trusts" are already striving to attain this goal by attempting to unite at least all the large-scale concerns in one branch of industry into one great joint-stock company with a practical monopoly.—/'. The possibility, therefore, of quantitative incongruity between price and magni- tude of value, or the deviation of the former from the latter, is inherent in the price-form itself. The direction taken by this change is determined by the dif- ficulties experienced in consequence of the unchanged form of the implement. Smith, Lemontey, and Say, as regards their criticisms of Division of Labour, and have shown, for the first time, that Division of Labour as practised in manufactures, is a specific form of the capitalist mode of production. The complete circulation, which begins with the receipt, concludes with the payment, of money for commodi- ties. If then, we reverse the series, 20 yards of linen =1 coat or =10 lbs. The starting-point of the development that gave rise to the wage-labourer as well' as to the capitalist, was the servitude of the labourer. The decisively revolutionary machine, the machine which attacks in an equal degree the whole of the num- berless branches of this sphere of production, dressmaking, tailor- 1 In England millinery and dressmaking are tor the most part carried on, on the premises of the employer, partly by workwomen who live there, partly by women who live off the premises. 36,777,334 yds. We put the constant part of the value of the product =0, as it plays no part in the creation of value. Now they give him a thirteenth shilling a week for lodging, that he must find far away in au open village. And why should not the workpeople eat their dinner before 9 in the morning? Ed. 1719. In every country there is a certain average intensity of la- bour, below which the labour for the production of a commodity requires more than the socially necessary time, and therefore does 1 "It is not accurate to say that wages" (he deals here with their money expression) "are increased, because they purchase more of a cheaper article." (David Buchanan in his edition of Adam Smith's "Wealth," &c, 1814, Vol. On this side of the Channel Owenism began to spread; on the other side, St. Simonism and Fourierism. In many cases a quarter of the body is torn from the trunk, and either involves death, or a future of wretched inca- pacity and suffering. The capitalist has bought the labour-power at its day-rate. 2 This distinction between division of labour in society and in manu- facture, was practically illustrated to the Yankees. 180,000,000 of debts contracted by the sovereigns!" 1 Colonial system, public debts, heavy taxes, protection, com- mercial wars, &c, these children of the true manufacturing period, increase gigantically during the infancy of Modern Indus- try. 303 CHAPTER XI RATE AND MASS OF SURPLUS-VALUE In this chapter, as hitherto, the value of labour-power, and therefore the part of the working-day necessary for the reproduction or maintenance of that labour-power, are supposed to be given, constant magnitudes. This it cannot so long as it sticks in its bourgeois skin. Castes and guilds arise from the action of the same natural law, that regulates the differentiation of plants and animals into species and varieties, except that, when a certain degree of devel- opment has been reached, the heredity of castes and the exclu- siveness of guilds are ordained as a law of society. . Jones: "Textbook of Lectures on the Pol. Part of the land was cul- tivated in severalty as freehold by the members of the community, another part — ager publicus — was cultivated by them in com- mon. One sort of article requires a longer, another a shorter time for its production. They are stowed away in cellars and lofts, or the hitherto respectable la- bourer's dwelling is transformed into a lodging-house whose per- sonnel changes as quickly as the billets in the 30 years' war. As inventions increased in number, and the demand for the newly discovered machines grew larger, the ma- chine-making industry split up, more and more, into numerous independent branches, and division of labour in these manufac- tures was more and more developed. Asa matter of fact, the reader is already familiar with numerous instances given in the chapter on the working- day. To all the different varieties of values in use there correspond as many different kinds of useful labour, classified according to the order, genus, species, and variety to which they belong in the social division of labour. Productive power has reference, of course, only to labour of some useful concrete form, the efficacy of any special productive activity during a given time being de- pendent on its productiveness. One after one the liber- ties of the people have been cloven down. Hence, production of a greater quantum of finished commodities in a given time. m. 3 Since the collective labourer has functions, both simple and complex, both high and low, his members, the individual labour- powers, require different degrees of training, and must therefore have different values. It has already been seen that, at the same time, the total number of persons employed in agriculture fell. c, p. On the one hand piece- wages facilitate the interposition of parasites between the capitalist and the wage-labourer, the "sub-letting of labour." The gain of these middlemen comes entirely from the difference between the labour-price which the capitalist pays, and the part of that price 1 "Le salaire peut se mesurer de deux manieres: ou sur la duree du tra- vail, ou sur son produit." ("Abrege elementaire des principes de l'Economie Politique." Paris 1796, p. One of the new taxes devised at Washington during the civil war, was the duty of 6% "on all industrial products." Question: What is an industrial product? The opinion that prices are determined by the quantity of the circulating medium, was also held by Barbon and other much earlier writers. If, e.g., the neces- sary labour amounts to 6 hours daily, expressed in a quantum of gold=3 shillings, then 3s. These acts curb the passion of cap- ital for a limitless draining of labour-power, by forcibly limit* ing the working-day by state regulations, made by a state that is ruled by capitalist and landlord. Hard work, saving, and avarice, are, therefore, his three cardinal virtues, and to sell much and buy little the sum of his political economy. But this is a mere quantitative difference, which for the present does not concern us. Thanks to the elasticity of labour- power, the domain of accumulation has extended without any previous enlargement of constant capital. 125.) 8 E.g., in the Scotch bleaching-works. The fact which here stares us in the face is, that a commodity and gold, 20 yards of linen and £2, have changed hands and places, in other words, that they have been exchanged. Hence the whole of the cotton used up in spinning the 20 lbs. The temperature of a bakehouse ranges from about 75 to upwards of 90 degrees, and in the smaller bakehouses approximates usually to the higher rather than to the lower degree of heat. c, p. 1 17 George Street, No. 49 . "If," says Wakefield, "all the members of the society are sup- posed to possess equal portions of capital ... The larger English glass manufac- turers, for instance, make their own earthenware melting-pots, be- cause, on the quality of these depends, to a great extent, the suc- cess or failure of the process. 40, 41. The rapid improvement of machinery, during the crisis, allowed the English manufacturers, immediately after the termination of the American Civil War, and almost in no time, to glut the markets of the world again. of Insp. 58, sq. The productiveness of labour that serves as its foundation and starting-point, is a gift, not of Nature, but of a history embracing thousands of centuries. It falls relatively to the magni- tude of the total capital, and at an accelerated rate, as this magnitude increases. 311.) 570 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION what he thinks cannot alter facts. "In several parishes of Hertfordshire," writes one indignant person, "24 farms, numbering on the average 50-150 acres, have been melted up into three farms." 4 "In Northamptonshire and Leices- tershire the enclosure of common lands has taken place on a very large scale, and most of the new lordships, resulting from the en- closure, have been turned into pasturage, in consequence of which many lordships have not now 50 acres ploughed yearly, in which 1,500 were ploughed formerly. "To qualify them for the work which they have to do, they require no intellectual training; there is little room in it for skill, and less for judgment; their wages, though rather high for boys, do not increase propor- tionately as they grow up, and the majority of them cannot look for advancement to the better paid and more responsible post of machine minder, because while each machine has but one minder, it has at least two, and often four boys attached to it." 2 As soon as they get too old for such child's work, that is about 17 at the latest, they are discharged from the printing establishments. Daire's Edit, of "Economistes Financiers du XVIII. The fact that it is value, is made mani- fest by its equality with the coat, just as the sheep's nature of a Christian is shown in his resemblance to the Lamb of God. 494 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION "Employed shall mean occupied in any handicraft, whether for wages or not, under a master or under a parent as herein de- fined." "Parent shall mean parent, guardian, or person, having the custody of, or control over, any . The capitalist class, as a whole, in any country, cannot over-reach themselves. 168, 169.) THE CONCEPT OF RELATIVE SURPLUS-VALUE 317 ing-day of 12 hours, 24 instead of 12 such articles. The injurious consequences soon manifested themselvesin reductions of wages, and so sweepingly quick was the fall in the price of labour, that many firms now pay only one half of the original wages. Emp. The prim- itive industrial capital, here, came in part directly out of the state treasury. Many of the hand-combers found employment in the facto- ries, but the produce of the hand-combers bears so small a proportion to that of the machine, that the employment of a very large number of combers has passed away." ("Rep. The workman must be in the factory at half past five. I, p. If, on the other hand, these same articles are links in the following chain of metamorphoses: 1 quarter of wheat — £2—20 yards of linen— £2—1 Bible— £2— 4 gallons of brandy— £2, a chain that is already well known to us, in that case the £2 cause the different commodities to circulate one after the other, and after realising their prices successively, and therefore the sum of those prices, £8, they come to rest at last in the pocket of the distiller. And yet those relations contain all that is essential to the determination of value. The linen expresses its value in the coat; the coat serves as the mate- rial in which that value is expressed. I., p. 1 The confidence that trusts in this appearance ought to receive a first severe shock from the fact that both forms of wages exist side by side, simultaneously, in the same branches of industry; e.g., "the compositors of London, as a general rule, work by the piece, time-work being the exception, while those in the country work by the day, the exception being work by the piece. On the other hand, it also serves as a measure of the portion of the common labour borne by each individual, and of his share in the part of the total product destined for individual consumption. of Nations." Hertford, 1852, p. Every organ of sense is injured in an equal degree by artificial elevation of the temper-' ature, by the dust-laden atmosphere, by the deafening noise, not to mention danger to life and limb among the thickly crowd- ed machinery, which, with the regularity of the seasons, issues workman had engaged himself for 2 years in a steelworks. Shirts, for instance, are a necessary means of subsistence, but are only one out of many. 1 H. There is now mate- rialised in this 20 lbs. The place of the slave-driver's lash is taken by the overlooker's book of penalties. . It is the negation of negation. +£90 var. It comes out of circulation, enters into it again, preserves and multiplies itself within its circuit, comes back out of it with expanded bulk, and begins the same THE GENERAL FORMULA FOR CAPITAL 155 round ever afresh. The simultaneous employment of a large number of wage-labourers, in one and the same process, which is a necessary condition of this change, also forms the starting-point of capital- ist production. The various operations that are per- formed in turns by the producer of a commodity, and coalesce one 1 This can be seen from W. When we speak of labour, or capacity for labour, we speak at the same time of the labourer and his means of subsist' ence, of labourer and wages." 1 When we speak of capacity for labour, we do not speak of labour, any more than when we speak of capacity for digestion, we speak of digestion. La- bour-power is the form under which variable capital exists during the process of production. "The rooms are generally the ordinary living rooms of small cot- tages, the chimney stopped up to keep out draughts, the inmates kept warm by their own animal heat alone, and this frequently in winter. It is only as expressions of such a unit that they are of the same denomination, and therefore commensu- rable. "I have here in view enclosures of open fields and lands already improved. Our next visit was to an iron labourer's wife, whose husband had worked in the yards. But since x black- ing, y silk, or z gold, &c, each represent the exchange-value of one quarter of wheat, x blacking, y silk, z gold, &c, must, as exchange-values, be replaceable by each other, or equal to each other. 1696, p. In the simple circulation of commodities, the two extremes of the circuit have the same economic form. To be able to read and write was for every one of them a requirement of their trade. The excep- tionally productive labour operates as intensified labour; it creates in equal periods of time greater values than average social labour of the same kind. Daire I. On the other hand, the gold, in its metallic reality, ranks as the embodiment of value, as money. All those things which labour merely separates from immediate connexion with their environment, are subjects of labour spontaneously pro- vided by Nature. 1 In the chapters on the production of surplus-value it was constantly pre-supposed that wages are at least equal to the value of labour-power. The same pieces of coin come into the seller's hand as the alienated form of the commodity and leave it as the absolutely alienable form of the commodity. 8 1. Capital, therefore, announces from its first appearance a new epoch in the process of social production. p- 27. A large part of this county is new land, marsh for- merly, or even, as in others of the eastern counties just named, won lately from the sea. By confounding these two forms, which overlap each other, some people have been led to look upon the preservation and increase of money ad infinitum as the end and aim of (Economic." (Aristoteles, "De Rep." edit. The transition from one operation to another interrupts the flow of his labour, and cre- ates, so to say, gaps in his working-day .These gaps close up so soon as 1 "The arts also have ... is determined not by equal quantities of labour." (E. The mass of social wealth, overflowing with the advance of accumulation, and transformable into additional capital, thrusts itself frantically into old branches of production, whose market suddenly expands, or into newly formed branches, such as railways, &c, the need for which grows out of the development of the old ones. John Brown & Co., steel and iron works, employing about 3,000 men and boys, part prevails, by which all employed on the paper-making machinery work 15 or 16 hours every day in the week. Now and then, however, as in his criticism of the ear- lier systems of Political Economy, he takes the right view. Total weekly average of butter (fat, etc.) 5 ounces per adult. The sum of all is — slavery! 1 Dr. Richardson, t c. of Fact., 31st Oct., 1865," p. It must not be forgotten that the East- end of London, which is here dealt with, is not only the seat of the iron shipbuilding mentioned above, but also of a so-called "home-industry" always underpaid. of Fact.," 31st October, 1848, p. If prices actually differ from values, we must, first of all, reduce the former to the latter, in other words, treat the difference as accidental in order that the phenomena may be observed in their purity, and our observations not interfered with by disturbing circumstances that have nothing to do with the process in ques- tion. 52,877 . 2 If money, according to Augier, a "comes into the world with a congenital blood-stain on one cheek," capital comes dripping from head to foot, from every pore, with blood and dirt. It contains the wretchedest cots to be found anywhere. A good description of the various forms of the Indian communities is to be found in George Campbell's "Modern In- dia." Lond., 1852. Therefore, when we speak of the progress of social ac- cumulation we tacitly include — to-day — the effects of centrali- sation. And of what does this surplus-product consist? THE GENERAL LAW OP CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 687 tunately, stood the chimney, a curved tube of clay and wood like an elephant's trunk. This was necessary to keep the naked feet of the young children from get- ting frost bitten, for it was a bitterly cold day. 1 The reader who is imbued with capitalist notions will naturally miss here the "interest" that the machine, in proportion to its capital value, adds to the product. Mr. Pusey, Chairman of the Royal Agricultural Society, de- clares that the (relative) expenses of farming have been reduced nearly one half by the introduction of new machinery. to 8.30 in the evening another set were "put to," &c. Whenever he discusses the productiveness of labour, he seeks in it, not the cause of surplus-value, but the 1 "Chaque travail doit (this appears also to be part of the droits et de- voirs du citoyen) laisser un excedant." Proudhon. 2 "Sophisms of Free Trade." By a Barrister. Ixxi. to 6 p. If it falls short, then, although the commodity itself is not harmed, its owner decidedly is. THE GENERAL LAW OP CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 659 Hunter, "on two points; first, that there are about 20 large colo- nies in London, of about 10,000 persons each, whose miserable condition exceeds almost anything he has seen elsewhere in Eng- land, and is almost entirely the result of their bad house accommo- dation; and second,, that the crowded and dilapidated condition of the houses of these colonies is much worse than was the case 20 years ago." 1 "It is not too much to say that life in parts of London and Newcastle is infernal." 2 Further, the better-off part of the working-class, together with the small shopkeepers and other elements of the lower middle class, falls in London more and more under the curse of these vile conditions of dwelling, in proportion as "improvements," and with them the demolition of old streets and houses, advance, as factories and the afflux of human beings grow in the metropo- lis, and finally as house rents rise with the ground-rents "Rents have become so heavy that few labouring men can afford more than one room." 3 There is almost no house-property in London that is not overburdened with a number of middlemen. THE WORKING-DAY 257 the inherent tendency of capitalist production. Hence their variety, which is such, that in the best London houses scarcely a dozen watches are made alike in the course of a year. Take as an example the labour of a bricklayer, which in England occupies a much higher level than that of damask-weaver. 11, n. 9.) 86 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION of his. 2 1. 1859.— 1 in 9. is not a freeman, nor is he a slave; he is a pauper." 4 The time just before the repeal of the Corn Laws threw new light on the condition of the agricultural labourers. By the co-operation of numerous wage-labourers, the sway of capital develops into a requisite for carrying on the labour-proc- ess itself, into a real requisite of production. In America the cultivation of land is often the secondary pursuit of a blacksmith, a miller or a shop- keeper." 1 With such queer people as these, where is the "field of abstinence" for the capitalists? What- ever is productively consumed is capital, and it becomes capital by con- sumption." (James Mill, 1. 324 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION in individual cases. of Fact., 31st Oct., 1865," pp. The following remarks will have to suffice. The one great industry of Ireland, linen-manufacture, requires relatively few adult men and only employs altogether, in spite of its expansion since the price of cotton rose in 1861-1866, a comparatively in- significant part of the population. The value, or in other words, the quantity of human labour contained in a ton of iron, is expressed in imagination by such a quantity of the money- commodity as contains the same amount of labour as the iron. The history of this struggle shows two opposed tendencies. One capitalist always kills many. But division of labour is a system of production which has grown up spontaneously and continues to grow behind the backs of the producers. mind that the development of the latter is only the expres- sion and result of the development of the former. EXPORT OF CORN, &c, FROM THE UNITED STATES TO GREAT BRITAIN. He opposes himself to Nature as one of her own forces, setting in motion arms and legs, head and hands, the natural forces of his body, in order to appropriate Nature's productions in a form adapted to his own wants. 3d. For instance, in the above case, the value of the labour-power cannot sink from three shillings to two, unless an increase in the productiveness of labour makes it possible to produce in 4 hours the same quantity of necessaries as previously required 6 hours to produce. 1846.-21,789,346 lbs. But of the advantage of the union I have no doubt. 2 The manufacture of lucifer matches dates from 1833, from the discovery of the method of applying phosphorus to the match itself. 1 11 persons Marshall Street, No. 28 . Assuredly no one was more thoroughly initiated in the mys- teries of this happiness than the late M. Began there, too, at 3 on Saturday morning — always did, but was very gain [near] home, and could sleep at home. "What care our great encroachers?" The dwellings of the peasants and the cottages of the labourers were razed to the ground or doomed to decay. In such forms capital has not yet acquired the direct control of the labour-process. "The same cause," says Adam Smith, "which raises the wages of labour, the increase of stock, tends to increase its productive powers, and to make a smaller quantity of labour produce a greater quantity of work." Apart from natural conditions, such as fertility of the soil, &c, and from the skill of independent and isolated producers 1 "It we now return to our first inquiry, wherein it was shown that capital itself is only the result of human labour ... u . . 2 "Machinery ...can frequently not be employed until labour (he means wages) rises." (Ricardo, 1. . 3 It is of no avail to deduce the exchange of more labour against less, from their difference of form, the one being realised, the other living. But what was the good of summoning the capitalists when the Courts, in this case the country magistrates— Gobbett's "Great Unpaid" — acquitted them? It is, however, to be regretted that he ventures on such haphazard assertions as the following: "By greater pulverising and more frequent ploughing, the cir- culation of air in the interior of porous soil is aided, and the surface exposed to the action of the atmosphere is increased and renewed; but it is easily seen that the increased yield of the land cannot be proportional to the labour spent on that land, but increases in a much smaller proportion. This is the special service that the capitalist expects from la- bour-power, and in this transaction he acts in accordance with the "eternal laws" of the exchange of commodities. Just as the substance iron, as a measure of weight, represents in relation to the sugar-loaf weight alone, so, in our expression of value, the material object, coat, in relation to the linen, represents value alone. 2 If the manufacturing system seize upon an industry, which, previously, was carried on in connexion with others, either as a chief or as a subordinate industry, and by one producer, these industries imme- diately separate their connexion, and become independent. * more free from stones though it be than ours. xiii.) 1 "Where the work in any trade is paid for by the piece at so much per job ... 38. Because, in the midst of all the acci- dental and ever fluctuating exchange-relations between the prod- ucts, the labour-time socially necessary for their production forcibly asserts itself like an over-riding law of Nature. 3. A Letter to Lord John Russell." Lond., 1821.) 3 "Capital, with compound interest on every portion of capital saved, is so all engrossing that all the wealth in the world from which income is derived, has long ago become the interest on capital." (London, Economist, 19th July, 1859.) 4 "No political economist of the present day can by saving mean mere hoarding: and beyond this contracted and insufficient proceeding, no use of the term in reference to the national wealth can well be imagined, but CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO CAPITAL 589 wealth is either wealth that is rescued from being destroyed in its existing form, i.e., from being consumed, or wealth that is with- drawn from circulation. of Fact, for 30 April, 1863," pp. This mechanical appliance replaces, not some particular tool, but the hand itself, which produces a given form by holding and guiding the cutting tool along the iron or other material operated upon. . With the revival of trade came of course an overflow from the waves of the ever fluctuating "reserve army" or "relative surplus-popula- tion." The frightful cellar habitations and rooms registered in the list, 1 which Dr. Hunter obtained from the agent of an Insurance 1 COLLECTING AGENTS LIST (BRADFORD) Houses Vulcan Street, No. 122 . Say (Traite, t. Thus it first took root in Holland. m. The rents are very high; 8 or £) persons packed in one sleeping apartment, in 2 cases 6 adults, each with 1 or 2 chil- dren in one small bedroom, THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 689 (5 .) Essex In this county, diminutions in the number of persons and of cottages go, in many parishes, hand in hand. ACCUMULATION OF CAPITAL 565 ourselves either about the new forms that capital assumes while in the sphere of circulation, or about the concrete conditions of re- production hidden under these forms. If, say in consequence of the exhaustion of flax-growing soil, the labour-time necessary for the production of the linen be doubled, the value of the linen will also be doubled. IV., ch. Domestic work, such as sewing and mending, must be replaced by the purchase of ready-made articles. »> » » »> >» » £95,844,222 57,028,289 36,415,225 22,809,781 8,744,762 308,416 23,334 3,619 832 91 105,435,738 64,554,297 42,535,576 27,555,313 11,077,238 332,431 24,265 4,021 973 107 In 1855 there were produced in the United Kingdom 61,453,079 tons of coal, of value £16,113,167; in 1864, 92,787,873 tons, of value £23,197,968; in 1855, 3,218,154 tons of pig-iron, of value £8,045,385; 1864, 4,767,951 tons, of value £11,919,877. . Jones: 1. xx. This fate has already in part overtaken them. 103,751 ,455 lbs. Barbon; 1. Early in the manufacturing period, the principle of lessening the necessary labour-time in the production of commodities, 1 was accepted and formulated: and the use of machines, especially for certain simple first processes that have to be conducted on a very large scale, and with the application of great force, sprang up here and there. . High, Is. 3d. . 224, and see p. m. Suppose, in consequence of the increased dearness of the products of the soil, that, the value of labour-power rises from 3 shillings to 4, and therefore the necessary labour-time from 6 hours to 8. The money, therefore, is not spent, it is merely advanced. Hence forms of social production that preceded the bourgeois form, are treated by the bourgeoisie in much the same way as the Fathers of the Church treated pre-Christian religions. In the first place, it must be observed that the machinery, while always entering as a whole into the labour-process, enters into the value-begetting process only by bits. But once in circulation, coins are, so to say, made responsible for one another. While the capitalist of the classical type brands individual consumption as a sin against his function, and as "abstinence" fiom accumulating, the modernised capitalist is capable of looking upon accumulation as "abstinence" from pleas- ure. But in time the old capital also reaches the moment of renewal from top to toe, when it sheds its skin and is reborn like the others in a perfected tech- nical form, in which a smaller quantity of labour will suffice to set in motion a larger quantity of machinery and raw materials. By this means he still squeezes an extra surplus-value of one penny out of each. This theory implies that the £1,500 worth of means of sub- sistence was capital that was being expanded by the labour of the 50 men discharged. . They became amphibious and lived, as an English author says, half on land and half on water, and withal only half on both. If it was originally say 1 : 1, it now becomes succes- sively 2 : 1, 3 : 1, 4 : 1, 5 : 1, 7 : 1, &c, so that as the capital increases, instead of -~- of its total value, only 2 _ .^ , „ MJ 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , g , &c, is transformed into labour-power, and, on the other hand, , into means of production. The extension B G of the line A B represents the length of the surplus-labour. Every other commodity now becomes 1 In Homer, tor instance, the value of an article is expressed in a se- ries oi different things. c, 4th February, 1866. It re- quires a fully developed production of commodities before, from accumulated experience alone, the scientific conviction springs up, that all the different kinds of private labour, which are carried on independently of each other, and yet as spontaneously devel- oped branches of the social division of labour, are continually being reduced to the quantitative proportions in which society requires them. 2 S. Not only does the degree of exploitation of the wage-labourer remain indecently low. For instance, one man is king only be- cause other men stand in the relation of subjects to him. de Molinari: "fitudes ficonomiques". This point of view, however, does not fall within the horizon of simple circulation." ("Zur Kritik, &c," pp. . 2 So long as, instead of two distinct use-values being exchanged, a chaotic mass of articles are offered as the equivalent of a single article, which is often the case with savages, even the direct barter of products is in its first infancy. Since productive power is an attribute of the concrete useful forms of labour, of course it can no longer have any bearing on that la- bour, so soon as we make abstraction from those concrete useful forms. 132.) CAPITALIST PRODUCTION must always be outraged, and morality almost of necessity must suffer. From what has gone before, we know that surplus- value is purely the result of a variation in the value of v, of that portion of the capital which is transformed into labour-power; con- sequently, v-fs=v+v' or v plus an increment of v. How could factory inspectors, with this complex book-keeping in respect to each individual child or young person, enforce the legally determined work-time and the granting of the legal meal-times? TWELVE HOUSES IN LANGTOFT. (1.) Diminishing productiveness of labour with a simultaneons lengthening of the working-day In speaking of diminishing productiveness of labour, we here refer to diminution in those industries whose products determine the value of labour-power; such a diminution, for example, as results from decreasing fertility of the soil, and from the corre- sponding dearness of its products. The branches that we are now about to examine, sole- ly with regard to those of the workpeople who work at home, and not those who work in manufactories or warehouses fall into two divisions, viz. In every respect better off than his Continental companion in misery. 2 In those factories that have been longest subject to the Factory Acts, with their compulsory limitation of the hours of labour, and other regula- tions, many of the older abuses have vanished. Conservation, in an unaltered form, of the old modes of production was on the contrary the first condition of existence for all earlier industrial classes. 459.) Infants that take opiates "shrank up into little old men," or "wizened like little monkeys." (1. * By decomposition of handicrafts, by specialisation of the in- struments of labour, by the formation of detail labourers, and by grouping and combining the latter into a single mechanism, division of labour in manufacture creates a qualitative grada- tion, and a quantitative proportion in the social process of production; it consequently creates a definite organisation of the labour of society, and thereby develops at the same time new productive forces in the society. On the other hand, he always finds this peasantry turning up again, although in diminished number, and always under worse conditions. A pamphlet published by Hardwicke about 2 years ago states that the abuses complained of in 1842, are in full bloom at the present day. The first metamorphosis of the linen puts these coins into the weaver's pocket, the second draws them out of it. 36.) This remarkable anonymous work, written in the last cen- tury, bears no date. To-morrow the article may, either altogether or par- tially, be superseded by some other appropriate product. In 1861 the number of persons occupied in England and Wales in the manufacture of agricultural machines was 1,034, whilst the number of agricul- tural labourers employed in the use of agricultural machines and steam-engines did not exceed 1,205. It will further be remembered that, with the development of the capitalist mode of production, there is an increase in the minimum amount of individual capital nec- essary to carry on a business under its normal conditions. In the middle, between these two stages, comes the glass melting proper, the manipulation of the fluid mass. Here, without furniture, huddled together were 3 adults and 5 children. If the average time that (doing a reasonable amount of work) an average labourer can live, is 30 years, the value of my labour-power, which you pay me from 1 1 day to day is 5 ~ Q or , Q of its total value. Realisation of the surplus-value nec- essarily carries with it the refunding of the value that was ad- vanced. There was now "more capi- tal" laid out in agriculture than before, and in a more productive form. . . The fathers of the present working-class were chastised for their en- forced transformation into vagabonds and paupers. LXVI1I., n. E.\ 42 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION Coats are not exchanged for coats, one use-value is not exchanged for another of the same kind. 242.) James Mill, however, never got on the track of this "remarkably peculiar property." 2 "It is true indeed, that the first introducing a manufacture employes many poor, but they cease not to be so, and the continuance of it makes many." ("Reasons for a Limited Exportation of Wool." London, 1677, p. These they laid before a celebrated 722 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION immediate results of the Reformation were not its most lasting ones. What, however, does belong to us as objects, is our value. 1860, p. Now, we saw, when we were considering the proc- ess of creating value, that, if a use-value be effectively consumed in the production of a new use-value, the quantity of labour ex- pended in the production of the consumed article, forms a portion of the quantity of labour necessary to produce the new use-value; this portion is therefore labour transferred from the means of pro- duction to the new product. In all cases it is the poverty of working populations. But it flourishes, it lets loose its whole energy, it attains its adequate classical form, only where the labourer is the private owner of his own means of labour set in action by himself: the peasant of the land which he cultivates, the artisan of the tool which he handles as a virtuoso. What really confronted them as capital, was the sum of £1,500, afterwards laid out in machinery. The money famine continues, whether payments have to be made in gold or in credit money such as bank-notes. c. 124, 129. c, pp. Value is independent of the particular use-value by which it is borne, but it must be embodied in a use-value of some kind. 2 "But it must be borne in mind that those improvements, though carried out fully in some establishments, are by no means general, and are not capa- ble of being brought into use in many of the old manufactories without an expenditure of capital beyond the means of many of the present occupiers." "I cannot but rejoice," writes Sub-Insp. . They always employ their own children, if they have any." (1. It will be remembered that if through the intro- duction of new, or the extension of old, machinery, a portion of variable capital is transformed into constant, the economic apolo- gist interprets this operation which "fixes" capital and by that very act sets labourers "free," in exactly the opposite way, pretend- ing that it sets free capital for the labourers. 1 With English writers the confusion between measure of value and standard of price (standard of value) is indescribable. The basis of the production of commodities can admit of production on a large scale in the capitalistic form alone. 296.) 3 In an American compendium that has gone through, perhaps, 20 edi- tions, this passage occurs: "It matters not in what form capital re-ap- pears;" then after a lengthy enumeration of all the possible ingredients of production whose value re-appears in the product, the passage concludes thus: "The various kinds of food, clothing, and shelter, necessary for the existence and comfort of the human being, are also changed. Rep. of Fact., 31st Oct., 1860," p. 41 .) Nevertheless, even with regard to ma- terial production, o-itapxeia, as opposed to division of labour remained their ideal, "7tap'covYap to, eo, napa xootcov xat to auTapxe?." It should be mentioned here that at the date of the fall of the 30 Tyrants there were still not 5,000 Athenians without landed property. "There is much in the evi- dence that shows that the parents of the children would, in many instances, be glad to be aided by the requirements of a legal obligation, to resist the pres- sure and the temptations to which they are often subject. s. . Great fortunes sprang up like mushrooms in a day; primitive accumulation went on without the advance of a shilling. The historical part is, to a great extent, a shameless plagiarism of Sir F. of Insp. certainly tend pie* maturely to exhaust the working power of the men." (I. Legislation on wage-labour (from the first, aimed at the ex- ploitation of the labourer and, as it advanced, always equally hostile to him), x is started in England by the Statute of La- bourers, of Edward III., 1349. MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OF COMMODITIES 113 It is constantly being precipitated into new places in the arena of circulation vacated by other commodities. The so-called primitive accumulation, therefore, is nothing else than the historical process of divorcing the producer from the means of production. Our estimated saving in waste is about 10% in the quantity of cotton consumed." "In another fine-spinning mill in Manchester, I was informed that through increased speed and the adoption of some self-acting processes, a reduction had been made, in number, of a fourth in one department, and of above half in another, and that the introduction of the combing 1 Ure, 1. No doubt, M becomes M+AM, £100 become £110. Let us return to the circulation of commodities. For instance, how is the fact to be expressed that weaving creates the value of the linen, not by virtue of being weaving, as such, but by reason of its general property of being human labour? E. Sir Robert Peel, by his Bank Act of 1844. Besides, the manufacturers petitioned Parliament to allow the employment of young persons and women for 12 hours during one year longer. xii. . Eden's "The State of the Poor," London, 1797. We will suppose it to consist of four-fifths constant and one-fifth variable, which means that only £100 is now laid out in labour-power. 2 The Roman Empire had handed down the elementary form of all machinery in the water-wheel. Assume that a capital G of £500 is made up of raw material, instruments of labour, &c. The overpowering competi- tion crushes the weakest of the manual labourers. But I am quite sure, from my best observation, that any given five men will, in their total, afford a proportion of labour equal to any other five within the periods of life I have stated; that is, that among such five men there will be one possessing all the qualifications of a good workman, one bad, and the other three middling, and approximating to the first and the last. Relics of by- gone instruments of labour possess the same importance for the investigation of extinct economic forms of society, as do fossil 1 "Reason is just as cunning as she is powerful. Ben- nett, a large farmer, magistrate, poor-law guardian, and wage- regulator, was asked: "Has any proportion of the value of daily labour been made up to the labourers out of the poors' rate?" Answer: "Yes, it has; the weekly income of every family is made up to the gallon loaf (8 lbs. But he sees really only the local oscillation of the labour-market in a particular sphere of production— he sees only the phenomena accompanying the distribution of the working population into the different spheres of outlay of capital, according to its varying needs. He says, "in case of need," the workmen can be moved at the will of the manager from one machine to another, and he triumphantly exclaims: "Such a change is in flat contradiction with the old routine, that divides the labour, and to one workman assigns the task of fashioning the head of a needle, to another the sharpening of the point." He had much better have asked himself, why this "old routine" is departed from in the automatic factory, only "in case of need." 2 When distress is very great, as, for instance, during the American Civil War, the factory operative is now and then set by the Bourgeois to do the roughest of work, such as road-making, &c. 7.) 2 "Rept.," &c, 30th Sept., 1844, p. Nevertheless, the London la- bour-market is always over-stocked with German and other candidates for death in the bakeries. 1 pp 31, 32. 2 "The great proportion of fixed to circulating capital . of Fact., for 31st Oct., 1848, p. of Fact, for 31st Oct., 1858/* pp.31. His answer is sim- ply childish. The next time he finished he had been on duty 14 hours 25 minutes, making a total of 29 hours 15 minutes without inter- mission. Compositor Agricultural labourer . In a second school I found the schoolroom 15 feet long, and 10 feet wide, and counted in this space 75 children, who were gabbling something unintelli- gible." 1 "But it is not only in the miserable places above referred to that the children obtain certificates of school attendance with- out having received instruction of any value, for in many schools where there is a competent teacher, his efforts are of little avail from the distracting crowd of children of all ages, from infants of 3 years old and upwards; his livelihood, miserable at the best, de- pending on the pence received from the greatest number of chil- dren whom it is possible to cram into the space. VALUE PRODUCED PER ACRE Seed, £1 90 Manure, 2 10 Wages, 3 10 Total, ... The masters from whom the legal limitation and regula- tion had been wrung step by step after a civil war of half a century, themselves referred ostentatiouslv to the contrast with the branches 1 During 1859 and 1860, the zenith years of the English cotton indus- try, some manufacturers tried, by the decoy bait of higher wages for over- time, to reconcile the adult male operatives to an extension of the working- day. or of 6x500 working-hours. The productiveness of a machine is therefore measured by the human labour-power it replaces. The capitalistic mode of production (essentially the pro- duction of surplus-value, the absorption of surplus-labour), produces thus, with the extension of the working-day, not only the deterioration of human labour-power by robbing it of its normal, moral and physical, conditions of development and function. Henceforward we use it to designate also the time necessary for the production of the particular commodity la- bour-power. Whenever the law limits the labour of children to 6 hours in industries not before interfered with, the complaints of the manufacturers are always renewed. 470.) 3 "L'Argent en (des denrees) est le signe." (V. . The secret of their inefficiency Bacon, without knowing it, reveals to us. 1640.) "It is impossible to look at a question of this sort absolutely by itself?" (n. PRODUCTIVENESS AND INTENSITY OF LABOUR CONSTANT. An increase occurred in the cultivation of green crops, turnips, mangold-wurzel, and the like; a decrease in the area under cultiva- tion for wheat of 16,000 acres; oats, 14,000; barley and rye, 4,000; potatoes, 66,632; flax, 34,667; grass, clover, vetches, rape-seed, 30,000. No child or young person [or female] shall be employed or allowed to remain in any room in which any manufacturing process is then [i.e., at meal- times] carried on," &c. It is, of course, highly desirable in the eyes of the petit bourgeois, for whom the production of commodities is the nee plus ultra of human freedom and individual independence, that the inconveniences resulting from this character of commodities not being directly exchange- able, should be removed. the majority of weavers are working at a reduction of 30 to 40 per cent, in their wages. (7 .) Huntingdon Hartford had, in 1851, 87 houses; shortly after this, 19 cot- tages were destroyed in this small parish of 1,720 acres; popu- lation in 1831, 452; in 1852, 832; and in 1861, 341. It is the very contrary in the circuit M — G — M. As a special method of producing relative surplus-value, it remains effective only, first, in so far ABSOLUTE AND RELATIVE SURPLUS-VALUE 511 as it seizes upon industries that previously were only formally subject to capital, that is, so far as it is propagandist; secondly, in so far as the industries that have been taken over by it, continue to be revolutionised by changes in the methods of production. Say: "Traite d'Econ. 24, 25, and 577.) The opinion that this difference is due to the difference in the price-relations between food and clothing then and now is refuted by the most cursory glance at "Chronicon Preciosum, &c." By Bishop Fleetwood. The Jewish historian has remarked upon the overthrow of Jerusalem by Titus that it was no wonder it should have .been destroyed, with such a signal destruction, when an inhuman mother sacrificed her own offspring to satisfy the cravings of absolute hunger." ("Public Economy Concentrated." Carlisle, 1833, p. Addendum to the 3rd ed.) 2 Reynolds' Newspaper, January, 1866. 1 "To an individual with a capital of £20,000, whose profits were £2,000 per annum, it would be a matter quite indifferent whether his capital would employ a 100 or 1,000 men, whether the commodity produced sold for £10,000 or £20,000, provided, in all cases, his profit were not diminished below £2,000. "Can the labourer," he asks, "merely with his arms and legs, produce commodities out of nothing? If I now sell a second quarter of corn, money indeed flows back to me, not however as a sequel to the first transaction, but in consequence of its repetition. 18.) North was himself one of the foremost merchants in the reign of Charles II. Its function as a means of payment in the settling of international balances is its chief one. Such productive consumption is distinguished from indi- vidual consumption by this, that the latter uses up products, as means of subsistence for the living individual; the former, as means whereby alone, labour, the labour-power of the living individual, is enabled to act. 331.) Our "proletarian" is economically none other than the wage-labourer who produces and increases capital, and is thrown out on the streets, as soon as he is superfluous tor the needs of aggrandisement of "Monsieur capi- tal," as Pecqueur calls this person "The sickly proletarian of the primitive forest," is a pretty Roscherian tancy The primitive forester is owner of the primitive forest, and uses the primitive forest as his property with 'the freedom ol an orang-outang He is not, therefore, a proletarian. 10.3 Mangold-wurzel, 14,073 14,839 316 Mangold-wurzel, 10.5 Cabbages, . In the forge the hours are from 12 to 12. In spite of this, all these pieces taken as a whole, may have had super- fluous labour-time spent upon them. . In our presence, in one quarter of this wonder- ful metropolis, are packed— next door to the most enormous accumulation of wealth the world ever saw — cheek by jowl with this are 40,000 helpless, starving people. II va du blanc au noir, II condamne au matin ses sentiments du soir. On looking closer it will be seen that this sum repre- sented part of the carpets produced in a year by the 50 discharged men, which part they received as wages from their employer in money instead of in kind. The conditions of production are also those of reproduction. The money-owner buys everything necessary for this purpose, such as raw material, in the market, and pays for it at its full value. He described it as a machine "to spin without fingers." 3 1 See, for instance, Hutton: "Course of Mathematics." 2 "From this point of view we may draw a sharp line of distinction between a tool and a machine: spades, hammers, chisels, &c, combinations of levers and of screws, in all of which, no matter how complicated they may be in other respects, man is the motive power, ... It was but quite recently struck out of the Penal Code. PIECE-WAGES 557 tions is done by people, who are hired for the day or on piece-work. an hour, and to do the work of a horse, 32 men, at a total cost of 8s. 916.) "The mines which are continually giving gold and silver, do give sufficient to supply such a needful balance to every nation." (J. Com. The official reports prove that the parents, even in the gang districts, loathe the gang-system. Hence nowhere do we find a more shameful squander- ing of human labour-power for the most despicable purposes than in England, the land of machinery. in his posthumous work, "Journals, Conversations and Essays relating to Ireland." 2 vols. It was "the strange God" who perched him- self on the altar cheek by jowl with the old Gods of Europe, and one fine day with a shove and a kick chucked them all of a heap. 2, c. It is not the place, here, to go on to show how division of labour seizes upon, not only the economic, but every other sphere of society, and everywhere lays the founda- tion of that all engrossing system of specialising and sorting men, that development in a man of one single faculty at the expense of all other faculties, which caused A. i., p. c, p. But it no longer holds good for each member taken individually. Silk weaving: 1851, 111,940: 1861, 101,678. Now since his work forms part of a system, based on the social division of labour, he does not directly produce the actual necessaries which he himself consumes; he produces instead a particular commod- ity, yarn for example, whose value is equal to the value of those necessaries or of the money with which they can be bought. For example, the same amount of labour in favourable seasons is embodied in 8 bushels of corn, and in unfa- vourable, only in four. This difficulty, however, does not prevent life insurance offices from drawing, by means of the theory of averages, very ac- curate, and at the same time very profitable conclusions. If we start from the notion that all commodities together form one single commodity, of which each is but an aliquot part, we get the following beautiful result: The total commodity=x cwt. St. Mill "Principles of Pol Econ ," Lond 1868, pp 252-53 passim. These gentle- men, however, attained their end through the obliging nature of the local poor law boards. The Roman slave was held by fetters: the wage-labourer is bound to his owner by invisible threads. of coffee only one-fourth as much sub- stance of value — labour — as is contained in 1 lb. 8 "Rep. There the property-relation conceals the labour of the slave for himself; here the money-relation conceals the unrequited labour of the wage-labourer. In Eng- land at the end of the 17th century, they arrive at a systematical combination, embracing the colonies, the national debt, the mod- ern mode of taxation, and the protectionist system. p- 25. MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 397 tation, and the sordid trafficking needs of the parents. Modern Industry had therefore itself to take in hand the machine, its characteristic instrument of production, and to construct machines by machines. The piston speed is easily ascertained. If one working-hour be embodied in sixpence, and the value of a day's labour-power be five shillings, the labourer must work 10 hours a day, in order to replace the value paid by capital for his labour-power, or to produce an equivalent for the value of his daily necessary means of subsistence. 169. In these cases, however, the money always acts as a means of purchase.... If the daily value of one la- bour-power =3s., then a capital of 300s. These machines were invented in Germany. 211.) 2 "The improvements which took place not long ago in frames for making patent netwereso great that a machine in good repair which had cost £1,200, sold a few years after for £60 . One or other of the two must yield. 6 Vols. On the condition of town dwellings, I quote, as preliminary, a general remark of Dr. Simon. 6, § 32. In the first case the capitalist appropriates to himself one-half, in the second, one- third of the working-hour without paying for it. 17. The value of every commodity is now, by being equated to linen, not only differentiated from its own use-value, but from all other use-values generally, and is, by that very fact, expressed as that which is common to all commodities. Very different com- binations are clearly possible, according as one of the three fac- tors is constant and two variable, or two constant and one vari- able, or lastly, all three simultaneously variable. The steam-engine is the parent of manufacturing owns." (A. lii, and ib. per hour, that it stands in painful contrast to the amount of injury produced to the health and stamina of the workpeople. A relatively thinly populated coun- try, with well-developed means of communication, has a denser population than a more numerously populated country, with bad- 1 Sir James Steuart is the economist who has handled this subject best. c, p. per head!. . 469.) With increase of capital, "the demand [for labour] will be in a diminishing ratio." (ibid. compared with thirty or forty years ago. In manufacture, the revolution in the mode of production begins with the labour-power, in modern industry it begins with the instruments of labour. of Insp. a week. because the wages are so much lower." (N. 742 CHAPTER XXIX GENESIS OP THE CAPITALIST FARMER Now that we have considered the forcible creation of a class of outlawed proletarians, the bloody discipline that turned them into wage-labourers, the disgraceful action of the State which employed the police to accelerate the accumulation of capital by increasing the degree of exploitation of labour, the question remains: whence came the capitalists originally? 233.) In these stormy, go-ahead times, therefore, the tulle manufacturers soon extended the working-day, by means of double sets of hands, from the original 8 hours to 24. 1830, p. A single equation, such as 1 ton of iron =2 ounces of gold, now suffices to express the value of the iron in a socially valid manner. 81.) The Observer, a semi-official government organ, contained the following paragraph on 24th April, 1864: "Some very curious rumours are current of the means which have been resorted to in order to create a scarcity of bank-notes.... Ulm, 1860," and others. 5, 6. . ... When we say that revenue is saved, and added to capital, what we mean is, that the portion of revenue, so said to be added to capital, is consumed by productive instead of unproductive labourers. On the former day the excess is nearly 12 per cent, over the average number of the four first days of the week, and on the latter day the excess is 25 per cent, over the average of the preceding five days; or, if the number of working-hours on Saturday being taken into account — Vl 2 hours on Saturday as compared with 10 x / 2 on other days— there is an excess of 65 per cent, on Saturdays MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 427 some accompaniments of the productive process, not to mention fche robbery of appliances for the comfort of the workman. It is true that this takes place, more or less, with every lengthening of the working-day; but in the case under consideration, the change is more marked, because the capital converted into the instruments of labour pre- ponderates to a greater degree. If they run away, they are to become up to this age the slaves of their masters, who can put them in irons, whip them, &c, if they like. Like the royal navy, the factories were recruited by means of the press-gang. &c, 30th April, 1860, p. (4) Farms over 1 5, not over 30 acres. 2 Wales here is always included in England. Besides, boys must begin young to learn the trade. II. 13.) 3 A purchase, in a "categorical" sense, implies that gold and silver are already the converted form of commodities, or the product of a sale. l (2.) Manufacture also arises in a way exactly the reverse of this— namely, by one capitalist employing simultaneously in one workshop a number of artificers, who all do the same, or the same kind of work, such as making paper, type, or needles. Both, therefore, shorten that portion of the working-day which the labourer needs to produce his means of subsistence or their equivalent. A further difficulty is caused by the original form of the variable capital. He there shows, amongst other things, how the monotonous and uselessly long school hours of the children of the upper and middle classes, uselessly add to the labour of the teacher, "while he not only fruitlessly but ab- solutely injuriously, wastes the time, health, and energy of the children." 3 From the Factory system budded, as Robert Owen 1 On the very advantageous results of combining gymnastics (and drilling in the case of boys) with compulsory education for factory children and pauper scholars, see the speech of N. daily. c, pp. Therefore -7= go jq*' qa giving a rate of surplus-value of more than 100%. Hinc turbae ortae et querulse textorum, tandemque usus hujus instrumenti a magistratu prohibitus est." After making various decrees more or less prohibitive against this loom in 1632, 1639, &c, the States General of Holland at length permitted it to be used, under cer- tain conditions, by the decree of the 15th December, 1661. 1 1. In order, therefore, that a commodity may in practice act effectively as exchange-value, it must quit its bodily shape, must transform itself from mere imaginary into real gold, although to the commodity such tran- substantiation may be more difficult than to the Hegelian "con- cept," the transition from "necessity" to "freedom," or to a lobster the casting of his shell, or to Saint Jerome the putting off of the old Adam. But where do you come from, then? It is clear, however, from internal evidence, that it ap- peared in the reign of George II. to 7 p. The historical conditions of its existence are by no means given with the mere circulation of money and commodities. . To sum up, the world is full of great, excellent, and daily service and benefit." (Martin Luther: "An die Pfarrherrn wider den Wucher zu predigen," Wittenberg, 1540.) 2 In "Zur Kritik der Pol. to 8 p. c, p. c, p. Therefore the constant portion of the value of the week's product is £378. Economy." New York, 1851, pp. [Added in the 3rd German edition. . But Ricardo reads him as if he had said, that labour (not the value of labour) is embodied both in use-value and exchange-value. How far this result is also attaina- ble, without cheapening commodities, will appear from an exami- nation of the particular modes of producing relative surplus- value, to which examination we now proceed. From 1770 to 1815 this trade was depressed or stagnant for 5 years only. 2 Martin Luther calls these kinds of institutions: "The Company Mo- nopolia." 310 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION others, as a pumper-out of surplus-labour and exploiter of labour- power, it surpasses in energy, disregard of bounds, recklessness and efficiency, all earlier systems of production based on directly compulsory labour. These same rights remain in force both at the outset, when the product belongs to its producer, who, ex- changing equivalent for equivalent, can enrich himself only by his own labour, and also in the period of capitalism, when social wealth becomes to an ever-increasing degree the property of those who are in a position to appropriate continually and ever afresh the unpaid labour of others. c, vol. It is this last part of the handicraftsman's implement that is first seized upon by the indus- trial revolution, leaving to the workman, in addition to his new labour of watching the machine with his eyes and correcting its mistakes with his hands, the merely mechanical part of being the moving power. 3 c , , then ' ' Working-day of 12 hours the necessary labour-time being 12 hours less the surplus-labour of 6 hours, we get the following result, Surplus-labour of 6 hours __100 Necessary labour of 6 hours - 100 1 That part of the product which merely replaces the constant capital advanced, is of course left out in this calculation. for 2 minutes; Is. for 3 minutes, and Is. 6d. That labourer alone is produc- tive, who produces surplus-value for the capitalist, and thus works for the self-expansion of capital. If the values of all commodities rose or fell simultaneously, and in the same proportion, their relative values would remain unaltered. While producing he consumes by his labour the means of production, and converts them into products with a higher value than that of the capital ad- vanced. 2 Let us now return to our illustration. 449. 46 sqq. This girl worked, on an average, 16^ hours, during the season often 30 hours, without a break, whilst her failing labour-power was revived by occasional supplies of sherry, port, or coffee. The question why this free labourer confronts him in the market, has no interest for the owner of money, who regards the labour-market as a branch of the general market for commodities. The ine- qualities would be compensated for the society at large, but not for the individual masters. This subjective principle of the division of labour no longer exists in production by machin- ery. It is the same thing when capital "abstains" from protective measures against dangerous machinery in the factory, from appliances for ventilation and for safety in mines, &c. . "The first and main object at which the new Land Act of 1862 aims is to give increased facilities for the settlement of the people." ("The Land Law of Victoria," by the Hon. The labourer needs time for satisfying his intellectual and social wants, the extent and number of which are conditioned by the general state of social advancement. 215, 216.) 730 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION all their fields turned into pasturage. Econ. If, e.g., the capital-value em- 7 1 ployed to-day in spinning is -x- constant and -5- variable, whilst at 1 1 the beginning of the 18th century it was — constant and -j varia- ble, on the other hand, the mass of raw material, instruments of labour, &c, that a certain quantity of spinning labour con^ sumes productively to-day, is many hundred times greater than at the beginning of the 18th century. The manufacturer is responsible for compliance with the Act. THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 621 mulation, metamorphosed by economists into a pretended law of Nature, in reality merely states that the very nature of accumu- lation excludes every diminution in the degree of exploitation of labour, and every rise in the price of labour, which could se- riously imperil the continual reproduction, on an ever-enlarging scale, of the capitalistic relation. In previous chapters we saw the destructive consequences of over- work; here we find the sources of the sufferings that result to the labourer from his in- sufficient employment. Barbon, 1. Insp. The shorter the period taken to reproduce its total value, the less is the danger of moral depreciation; and the longer the working-day, the shorter is that period. a day for the good of the family? 1 There is, however, something else required beyond the ex- pression of the specific character of the labour of which the value of the linen consists. . 2 Within the process of production, as we have seen, capital acquired the command overlabour, i.e., over functioning labour- power or the labourer himself. Every minute's stoppage is not only a loss of power, but of produc- tion, and the workpeople are urged by the overlookers, who are interested in the quantity of work turned off, to keep the machinery in motion; and it is no less important to those of the operatives who are paid by the weight or piece, that the machines should be kept in motion. Yet another interesting phenomenon here presents itself. See also numerous Instances in the "Reports of the Children's Employment Commission." 2 In 1861, in England and Wales, there were 94,665 sailors in the merchant service. In fact, in those countries in which both metals are legally measures of value, and therefore both legal tender, so that everyone has the option of paying in either metal, the metal that rises in value is at a premium, and, like every other commodity, measures its price in the over-estimated metal which alone serves in reality as the standard of value. Vincent Street, Green Aire Place, and the Leys include 223 houses having 1,450 inhabit- ants, 435 beds, and 36 privies The beds — and in that term I include any roll of dirty old rags, or an armful of shavings — have an average of 3.3 persons to each, many have 5 and 6 persons to each, and some people, I am told, are absolutely without beds; they sleep in their ordinary clothes, on the bare boards — young men and women, married and unmarried, all together. . I., pp. The detail operations may further be carried on like so many independent handicrafts, as they are in the Cantons of Vaud and Neufchatel; while in Geneva there exist large watch manufactories where the detail labourers directly co-operate under the control of a single capitalist. From 1815 to 1821 depression; 1822 and 1823 pros- perity; 1824 abolition of the laws against Trades' Unions, great extension of factories everywhere; 1825 crisis; 1826 great misery and riots among the factory operatives; 1827 slight improvement; 1828 great increase in power-looms, and in exports; 1829 exports, as to which could turn out the neatest article. Let us now turn to its aspect as a whole. The labour-process is a process between things that the capitalist has purchased, things that have become his property. This is one of the few counties, in which circumstances do not secure to the farmer undisputed proprietary rights over the agricultural 578 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION himself, by his change of masters, and by the oscillations in the market-price of labour-power. This judgment was given not by the "Great Unpaid," the provincial Dogberries, but by one of the highestcourts of justice in London. MacGulloch's exception therefore proves only his misapprehension of the rule, a misfortune that as often happens to him in the vulgarisation of Ricardo, as it does to J. "A frightful spectacle was to be seen yesterday in one part of the metropolis. Pitt, in the month of November 1795," Edit. — now admit of the rapidest transforma- tion of masses of surplus-product into additional means of pro- duction. His usufruct is spread over two periods. Its leading mo- tive, and the goal that attracts it, is therefore mere exchange- value. We have no need at present to in- vestigate the value of this cotton, for our capitalist has, we will 1 As has been stated in a previous note, the English language has two different expressions for these two different aspects of labour: in the Simple Labour-process, the process of producing Use-Values, it is Work; in the process of creation of Value, it is Labour, taking the term in its strictly eco- nomic sense. . The cost of keeping the family increases, and balances the greater income. But by means of the price that you pay for it each day, I must be able to reproduce it daily, and to sell it again. were it not for the small owners, would, for by far the most part, have to sleep under the trees of the farms on which they work." (1. Hamburg, 1869, pp. The jurist's consciousness recognises in this, at most, a material difference, ex- pressed in the juridically equivalent formulae: "Do ut des, do ut facias, facio ut des, facio ut facias." Further. "Temperate living and constant em- ployment is the direct road, for the poor, to rational happiness" [by which he most probably means long working-days and little means of subsistence], "and to riches and strength for the state" (viz., for the landlords, capitalists, and their political dignitaries and agents). of Insp. When these proportions have, by custom, at- tained a certain stability, they appear to result from the nature of the products, so that, for instance, one ton of iron and two ounces of gold appear as naturally to be of equal value as a pound of 1 When, therefore, Galiani says: Value is a relation between per- sons — "La Ricchezza e una ragione tra due persone," — he ought to have added: a relation between persons expressed as a relation between things. What- ever difference in skill there may be between the labour of a spinner and that of a jeweller, the portion of his labour by which the jeweller merely replaces the value of his own labour-power, does not in any way differ in quality from the additional portion by which he creates surplus-value. The effect is the same as if the means of production had cost less. Although invisible, the value of iron, linen and corn has actual existence in these very articles: it is ideally made perceptible by their equality with gold, a relation that, so to say, exists only in their own heads. A riddle with which Quesnay, one of the founders of Political Economy, tormented his opponents, and to which they could give him no answer. x Since, however, the properties of a thing are not the result of its relations to other things, but only manifest themselves in such relations, the coat seems to be endowed with its equivalent form, its property of being directly exchangeable, just as much by Nature as it is endowed with the property of being heavy, or the capacity to keep us warm. I hope I have said enough to make it appear that the moderate labour of six days in a week is no slavery. . * The protection afforded by the Factory Acts against dangerous machin- ery has had a beneficial effect. He can strike so many blows per day, walk so many steps, breathe so many breaths, produce so much work, and live an aver- age, say of fifty years; he is made to strike so many more blows, to walk so many more steps, to breathe so many more breaths per day, and to increase altogether a fourth of his life. Among instruments that are the result of previous labour and also belong to this class, we find workshops, canals, roads, and so forth. The result of about a year's working was that "the same amount of product for the same cost was received, and the workpeople as a whole earned in eleven hours as much wages as they did before in twelve." 3 1 pass over the experiments made in the spinning and carding rooms, because they were accompanied by an increase of 2% in the speed of the machines. . One single envelope machine now performs all these operations at once, and makes more than 3,000 envelopes in an hour. Both are uses of the sandal, for even he who exchanges the sandal for the money or food he is in want of, makes use of the sandal as a sandal. 25, 26. "The unpaid labour of the men was made the source whereby the competition was carried on." 2 And the "full-priced" baker denounces his underselling competitors to the Commission of Inquiry as thieves of foreign labour and adulterators. The same applies to the labour embodied in the spindle, without whose wear and tear the cotton could not be spun. +£90 surpl., and that the capital ad- vanced =£500. In order that he may be able to do this, he must have it at his disposal, must be the untrammelled owner of his capacity for labour, i.e., of his person. s Nasmyth, the inventor of the steam-hammer, gives the fol- lowing evidence before the Trades' Union Commission, with re- gard to the improvements made by him in machinery and intro- duced in consequence of the wide-spread and long strikes of the engineers in 1851. I have not one cottage on my farm. 18, 19. Weaving, which is the labour of certain private individ- uals producing a particular article, linen, acquires in consequence a social character, the character of equality with all other kinds of labour. The very essence of this form is that the material commodity itself — the coat — just as it is, expresses value, and is endowed with the form of value by Nature itself. The provisions of the labour statutes as to contracts between master and workman, as to giving notice and the like, which only allow of a civil action against the contract-breaking master, but on the contrary permit a criminal action against the contract- breaking workman, are to this hour (1873) in full force. The training which they give to an apprentice is considered as part of the return for the boys' labour, and thus enables the men to get it at a cheaper rate. CM vr t^ OS wiO ifliO iO t^ t^ CM o oo oo V}< o CO t^ CO 00 CO © 00 CM CM <vr-< »— , oo o LO CO OS OS iO vr o lO CO CO o CO to •*H c^ d 00 00 l> lO CM OS 00* TH CO oo CM CO 00 CO m o 8 00 OS § -r-lrt *3- <* CO* vr 1 g o CM CO o" 55 00 CM CM CM t-* CM OS o OS t^ CM CM o- OS s 00 o COO O0 •* OS ■^H t— OS d oo oo 00 VO CO CM CO CM CM CM OS CM CO CO o o. 812,589 yds. 9.) "Over-working to a very considerable extent still prevails; and, in most instances, with that security against detection and punishment which the law itself affords. Let us put ourselves in the place of the labourer who re- ceives for 12 hours' labour, say the value produced by 6 hours' la- bour, say 3s. 10.) "The price of the necessaries of life is, in fact, the cost of producing labour." (Malthus, "Inquiry into, &c, Rent," London, 1815, p. For since in each year more labourers are em- ployed than in its predecessor, sooner or later a point must be reached, at which the requirements of accumulation begin to sur- pass the customary supply of labour, and, therefore, a rise of wages takes place. . Macaulay, who has falsified English history in the interests of the Whigs and the bourgeoisie, declares as follows: "The practice of setting children prematurely to work ... 14.) 728 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION proportion between arable land and pasture had to be established. Redgrave in "Reports of the Insp.of Fact., 30th April, I860," p. May, "that notwithstanding the tem- porary disorganisation which inevitably follows the introduction of such a measure (as the Factory Acts Extension Act), and is, indeed, directly indic- ative of the evils which it was intended to remedy, &c." (Rep, of Insp. l Apart from these contradictions, a direct exchange of money, i.e., of realised labour, with living labour would either do away with the law of value which only begins to develop itself freely on the basis of capitalist production, or do away with capitalist production itself, which rests directly on wage-labour. Further suppose that the raw material annual- ly consumed costs £3,000, both before and after the change. 423.) 576 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION capital and enrichment I advise a loan (of five or six millions sterling), . This narrow technical basis excludes a really scientific analysis of any definite process of industrial production, since it is still a condition that each detail process gone through by the prod- uct must be capable of being done by hand and of forming, in its DIVISION OF LABOUR AND MANUFACTURE 339 way, a separate handicraft. forbade a higher day's wage than 2s. 295.) "If you obtained your wish in getting an inferior class of inspectors appointed, do you think that there would be no danger from want of skill, &c?" "I think not, I think that the Govern- ment would see after that, and have proper men in that position." 502 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION (n. Trade Ofl xaur^ay./) is literally retail trade, and Aristotle takes this kind because in it values in use predominate) does not in its nature belong to Chrematistic, for here the exchange has reference only to what is necessary to themselves (the buyer or seller)." Therefore, as he goes on to show, the original form of trade was barter, but with the extension of the latter, there arose the necessity for money. Now if, in consequence of such a rise or fall in the value of gold, the sum of the prices of commodities fall or rise, the quantity of money in currency must fall or rise to the same extent. 6d.; the total yearly expenditure of a family of 6 persons, £36 12s. c, p. The mining industry allows the latter some choice. Many a shepherd and cottar too with his wife and children, appeared at Church in clothes which had been touched by no hands but their own, since they were shorn from the sheep and sown in the flaxfield. m 15 minutes. Paris, 1823, p. c, pp. His observations during many preceding years had led him to the conclusion that "to avert starvation diseases," the daily food of an average woman ought to contain at least 3,900 grains of carbon with 180 grains of nitrogen; the daily food of an average man, at least 4,300 grains of carbon with 200 grains of nitrogen; for women, about the same quantity of nutritive elements as are contained in 2 lbs. The General Congress of Labour at Baltimore (August 16th, 1866) declared: "The first and great necessity of the present, to free the labour of this country from capitalistic slavery, is the passing of a law by which eight hours shall be the normal working-day in all States of the Ameri- can Union. M1 Horner, therefore, came to the conclusion that a reduction of the working-hours below twelve would ne- cessarily diminish production. But only in so far as it is itself a product of labour, and, therefore, potentially variable in value, can gold serve as a measure of value. 2 "Desire implies want; it is the appetite of the mind, and as natural as hunger to the body.... This I attribute ... And even if it were so, a machine working 16 hours daily for 7y years, covers as long a working period as, and transmits to the total product no more value than, the same machine would if it worked only 8 hours daily for 15 years. 89. 26. Engels showed in 1844 exactly the same horrors, exactly the same transient canting outcries of "sensational literature." But frightful increase of "deaths by starvation" in 1 H. 3 Report (First) &c. Machinery is put to a wrong use, with the object of transforming the workman, from his very childhood, into a part of a detail-machine. Since 1845 this manufacture has rapidly devel- oped in England, and has extended especially amongst the thickly populated parts of London as well as in Manchester, Birmingham, Liverpool, Bristol, Norwich, Newcastle and Glas- gow. Before this law the working-day in France was without definite limit. We are not aware of this, nevertheless we do it. 1. (8.) Lincolnshire Langtoft. It is self-evident that, under these circumstances, the meagre comforts that Eden still found in the cottage of the agricultural labourer, had vanished by 1814. The description of the workshops, more especially those of the London printers and tail- ors, surpasses the most loathsome phantasies of our romance writ- ers. (x'/.ivat ttsvts dvii — ojov at ttsvts xX(vat) He further sees that the value-relation which gives rise to this expression makes it necessary that the house should quali- tatively be made the equal of the bed, and that, without such an equalisation, these two clearly different things could not be compared with each other as commensurable quantities. 3, 1873, p. But the collective labourer, who consti- tutes the living mechanism of manufacture, is made up solely of such specialised detail labourers. 2 26 persons Cella rs Regent Square ...... In 1832, the distance travelled in following a pair of mules, spinning cotton yarn of the same number, was 20 miles, and frequently more. 1 their value, in discovering that form under which value becomes exchange- value. The two-fold social character of the la- bour of the individual appears to him, when reflected in his brain, only under those forms which are impressed upon that labour in every-day practice by the exchange of products. Although labour-power would be unchanged in price, it would be above its value. But if we abstract from their use-value, there remains their Value as defined above. During what is called 'the London season,' the operatives belonging to the 'full-priced' bakers at the West End of the town, generally begin work at 11 p. All medical testimony agrees on this point, and personal observation at different times has convinced me of 294 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION of the Factory Inspector, renewed every 6 months, the mischief continues to this hour. TRANSITION OF THE LAWS OF PROPERTY THAT CHARACTERISE PRODUCTION OF COMMODITIES INTO LAWS OF CAPITALIST APPROPRIATION Hitherto we have investigated how surplus-value emanates from capital; we have now to see how capital arises from sur- plus-value. The existence of such a class is inexplicable from the standpoint we have so far reached, viz., that of simple circulation. Its use-value becomes distinguished from its exchange- value. We find this individual difference, but are not deceived by it, in the system of slavery, where, frankly and openly, without any circumlocution, labour-power itself is sold. But we would sooner be prevented from employing boys under the age of 13, or even so high as 14, at all, than not be allowed to employ boys that we do have at night. An Act to limit the hours of labour, &c, § 1 and 2. 2 "Ch. Empl. What is really wonderful is the healthy integrity of character, he has, in great part, retained. Where in our country agriculture on a large scale exists, hence particularly in the East, it has become possible only in consequence of the clearing of the estates ("Bauernlegen"), a practice which became widespread in the 16th century and was particularly so since 1648.— F. 48, 56. On the other hand, the conver- sion of fractional work into the life-calling of one man, corresponds to the tendency shown by earlier societies, to make trades heredi- tary; either to petrify them into castes, or whenever definite his- torical conditions beget in the individual a tendency to vary in a 1 "The more any manufacture of much variety shall be distributed and assigned to different artists, the same must needs be better done and with greater expedition, with less loss of time and labour." ("The Advantages of the East India Trade," Lond , 1720, p. PRODUCTIVENESS OF LABOUR CONSTANT. Once discovered, the law of the deviation of the magnetic needle in the field of an electric current, or the law of the magnetisation of iron, around which an electric current circulates, cost never a penny. 241.) 620 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION that makes capital insufficient; but, conversely, the relative diminution of capital that causes the exploitable labour-power, or rather its price, to be in excess. In the former, where the physiological division of labour is the starting-point, the particular organs of a compact whole grow loose, and break off, principally owing to the exchange of commodities with foreign communities, and then isolate them- selves so far, that the sole bond, still connecting the various kinds of work, is the exchange of the products as commodities. The relative value of money will, therefore, be less in the nation with more developed capitalist mode of production than in the nation with less developed. Hence, the character of inde- pendence and estrangement which the capitalist mode of produc- tion as a whole gives to the instruments of labour and to the prod- uct, as against the workman, is developed by means of machinery into a thorough antagonism. By this form, commodities are, for the first time, effectively brought into relation with one another as values, or made to appear as exchange-values. It is of the highest impor- tance, he says, "to keep separate the passion for expenditure and the passion for accumulation." 4 The capitalists having long been good livers and men of the world, uttered loud cries. Capitalistic production advances there with giant strides, even though the lowering of wages and the dependence of the wage-worker are yet far from being brought down to the normal European level. in what proportions the products are exchangeable? 2 This method of determining, from the standpoint of the labour- process alone, what is productive labour, is by no means directly applicable to the case of the capitalist process of production. 'Is it worth while keeping the machinery in order?' again asks Mr. Potter. Ellis, one of the firm of Messrs. Senior uses West's work without mentioning it, he says: "The labourer is principally interested in the amount of wages" (p. ... of corn = I I / 1 a ton of iron = x commodity A = J 70 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION In passing from form A to form B, and from the latter to form C, the changes are fundamental. It is just as if the cotton had converted itself into yarn, without help; as if the shape it had assumed was mere trickery and deceit: for so soon as our capitalist sells it for 24s., and with the money replaces his means of production, it becomes evident that this 16 lbs. . Greg, 1837. This condition is fulfilled by money taking the form of hoards. 131. it might, &c, ... He is unable to add new labour, to create new value, without at the same time preserving old values, and this, because the labour he adds must be of a specific useful kind; and he cannot do work of a useful kind, without employing products as the means of production of a new product, and thereby transferring their value to the new product. Discrete work- shops, for the most part combined with cultivation of smallholdings, are the only free ones." * The expropriation and eviction of a part of the agricultural population not only set free for industrial capi- tal, the labourers, their means of subsistence, and material for labour; it also created the home-market. 2 Ramazzini, professor of practical medicine at Padua, published in 1713 his work "De morbis artiflcum", which was translated into French 1781, reprinted 1841 in the "Encyclopedic des Sciences Medicales. 29, 1, THE GENERAL LAW OP CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 707 have they begun to form a fraction of the class of purely wage- labourers, a special class, connected with its wage-masters only by monetary relations. And from the mo- ment that this exclusion becomes finally restricted to one particu- lar commodity, from that moment only, the general form of rel- ative value of the world of commodities obtains real consistence and general social validity. Moreover, we see at a glance that, in our capitalist society, a given portion of human labour is, in accordance with the varying demand, at one time supplied in the form of tailoring, at another in the form of weaving. to 7 or 7.30 p. All other circumstances remaining the same, individual capitals, and with them the concentration of the means of produc- tion, increase in such proportion as they form aliquot parts of the total social capital. 4 "What money is more than of absolute necessity for a Home Irade, is dead stock ... 7, 8.) 4 Strictly, Aristotle's definition is that man is by nature a town-cit- izen. Lond., 1777, Vol. Apart from the increased yield of relative surplus-value through the heightened productive- ness of labour, the same mass of value is now produced for the cap- 1 2 italist say by 3-~- hours of surplus-labour, and 6— hours of neces- o o sary labour, as was previously produced by four hours of surplus- labour and eight hours of necessary labour. By increase in the productiveness of labour, we mean, generally, an alteration in the labour-process, of such a kind as to shorten the labour-time socially necessary for the pro- duction of a commodity, and to endow a given quantity of labour with the power of producing a greater quantity of use-value. To perpetuate it would be, as Pec- queur rightly says, "to decree universal mediocrity." At a cer- tain stage of development it brings forth the material agencies for its own dissolution. But assume that the duration of the labour necessary for the production of a coat becomes doubled or halved. In consequence of the cotton famine, it grew in the years 1863 and 1864 to 1",079,382 and 1,014,978. . Suddenly the voice of the labourer, which had been stifled in the storm and stress of the process of production, rises: The commodity that I have sold to you differs from the crowd of other commodities, in that its use creates value, and a value greater than its own. He must constantly look upon his labour-power as his own property, his own com- modity, and this he can only do by placing it at the disposal of the buyer temporarily, for a definite period of time. ... The example of Limerick led to a retrogres- sion in Ennis and Tipperary. The one arises from use, as coins wear away by circulating, the other from non-use, as a sword rusts when left in its scabbard. The property therefore which labour-power in action, living labour, possesses of preserving value, at the same time that it adds it, is a gift of Nature which costs the labourer nothing, but which is very advantageous to the capitalist inasmuch as it preserves the existing value of his capital. Com. 2 A French workman, on his return from San- Francisco, writes as follows: "1 never could have believed, that ( was capable ol working at the various occupations 1 was employed on in California. 126). 2.) Xenophon here lays stress exclusively upon the excellence to be attained in use-value, although he well knows that the gra- dations of the division of labour depend on the extent of the market. Its last word is the misery of constantly extending strata of the active army of labour, and the dead weight of pauperism. By the simple addition of a certain quantity of labour, new value is added, and by the quality of this added labour, the orig- inal values of the means of production are preserved in the prod- uct. His answer is unlike that of Ure, Senior, &c, and their puny German plagiarists a la Roscher who are touched by the "abstinence," "self-denial," "saving," of the capitalists in the expenditure of their gold, and by their Timur-Tamer- lanish prodigality of human life! "A certain amount of heat beyond what is usual at present might also be going to waste, if meal-times were secured in these cases, but it seems likely not equal in money-value to the waste of animal power now going on in glass-houses throughout the kingdom from growing boys not having enough quiet time to eat their meals at ease, with a little rest afterwards for digestion." (1. of yarn; and similarly with regard to the spindle. The collective labourer, formed by the combination of a num- ber of detail labourers, is the machinery specially characteristic of the manufacturing period. The various parts of the work progress simultaneously. I therefore concluded, that as an active and intel- ligent mill-owner would find out the safe maximum, it would not be possible to produce as much in eleven hours as in twelve. A single man cannot operate upon Nature without calling his own muscles into play under the control of his own brain. This fundamental truth once established, Mill establishes his own superiority over the mercantilists. The magnitude of the profit whets his appetite for more profit. The means of production on the one hand, labour-power on the other, are merely the different modes of existence which the value of the original capital assumed when from being money it was transformed into the various factors of the labour-process. They conquered the field for capitalistic agri- culture, made the soil part and parcel of capital, and created for the town industries the necessary supply of a "free" and outlawed proletariat. "The cotton trade has existed for ninety years. We now proceed to distinguish the co-operation of a number of machines of one kind from a complex system of machinery. As an example, both of continuity of production, and of the carrying out of the automatic principle, we may take a modern paper mill. B. "A man who has plenty of wine and no corn treats with a man who has plenty of corn and no wine; an exchange takes place between them of corn to the value of 50, for wine of the same value. . And as the labourers make men rich, so the more labourers there will be, the more rich men ... Paris, 1817, t. 5 It is constantly changing from one form to the other without thereby becoming lost, and thus assumes an auto- matically active character. Econ- omy in the means of production, first systematically carried out in the factory system, and there, from the very beginning, co- incident with the most reckless squandering of labour-power, and robbery of the conditions normally requisite for labour — this economy now shows its antagonistic and murderous side more and more in a given branch of industry, the less the social pro- ductive power of labour and the technical basis for a combination of processes are developed in that branch. All this was at Feltham, also tells of cases where all relief was denied to certain families "because they were sending their children to school!" 1 Wherever handicraft-machines, driven by men, compete directly or indirectly with more developed machines driven by mechanical power, a great change takes place with regard to the labourer who drives the machine. of Fact, for 31st Oct., 1862," p. The change in the quantity of the circulating medium is, in this case, it is true, caused by the money itself, vet not in virtue of its function as a medium of circulation, but of its function as a measure of value. In my "Misere de la Philosophic" I have sufficiently explained the historical con- nexion between Ferguson, A. This tendency is nurtured by the very nature of the sewing-machine, the manifold uses of which push on the concentration, under one roof, and one management, of previously separated branches of a trade. or of 100 x 3 working-hours. Hence the comparatively rapid advance since 1860. . C — M. 38.) In many respects a book to be recom- mended. 247.) 350 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION bilities. To exchange a pound of bread against a pound of bread ... In 1864, however, they were brought under the Act, and within sixteen months every "im- possibility" had vanished. 875,782 . Our labouring people do this, and to all appearance are the hap- piest of all our labouring poor, l but the Dutch do this in manufactures, and appear to be a very happy people. But here, to make amends to capital bereft of its "freedom," the work-time for children from 11 to 13 was raised from 10 to 10— hours. 8 1. During the second half of the 14th century he is replaced by a farmer, whom the landlord provides with seed, cattle and implements. 1 The normal working- day exists here as a fraction of the actual working-day, and the latter, often during the whole year, lasts longer than the former. D. Such reflux is not dependent on the commodity being sold for more than was paid for it. This was, in December, 1862, 29,211 grains of carbon, and 1,295 grains of nitrogen weekly. 61-62. 76.) THE BUYING AND SELLING OF LABOUR-POWER 171 special article. In economic forms of society of the most different kinds, there occurs, not only simple reproduction, but, in varying de- grees, reproduction on a progressively increasing scale. Every owner of a commodity wishes to part with it in exchange only for those commodities whose use-value satisfies some want claimed to regulate the composition and decomposition ol matter by means of the "eternal ideas," of "naturalite" and "aft'inite"? This was done on the larg- est scale, and as if in obedience to a command from on high. that, with a given rate of surplus-value, we may have any number of rates of profit, and that various rates of surplus-value may, under given conditions, express themselves in a single rate of profit. Passage of Modern Manufacture, and Domestic Industry into Modern Mechanical Industry. They are there to absorb surplus-labour, and naturally absorb more in 24 hours than in 12. 308.) This was rather too much for the adherents of the old classical school. It has not done so with labour, for much machinery has been idle last year for want of hands." ("Rep. 203, 204.) My article was reprinted in a Scotch newspaper, and led to a pretty po- lemic between the latter and the sycophants of the Sutherlands. 2 It is one of the chief failings of classical economy that it has never succeeded, by means of its analysis of commodities, and, in particular, of COMMODITIES 81 bear it stamped upon them in unmistakeable letters that they belong to a state of society, in which the process of production has the mastery over man, instead of being controlled by him, such formulae appear to the bourgeois intellect to be as much a self-evident necessity imposed by Nature as productive labour itself. In English barracks the regulation space allotted to each soldier is 500-600 cubic feet, and in the military hospitals 1,200 cubic feet. c, p. Persons. He has reached the zero from which are dated the calculations of the farmer. "I may make over to another the use, for a limited time, of my particular bodily and mental aptitudes and capabil- ities; because, in consequence of this restriction, they are impressed with a character of alienation with regard to me as a whole. Engels, 1. It will be noted that, just like Bankes, this "low church pope," this head of English pietists, pockets a great part of the miserable wages of the labourers under the pretext of house-rent: — FIRST VILLAGE a S-i -o O) Si • eekly e of hole y. Hence, a definite por- tion of each year's product belongs to the domain of production. 1 Capital: "portion fructifiante de la richesse accumulee ... 2, 3. They hope to pay the rent by the straw-plaiting of the fam- ily. "It would be desirable the inspectors should come oftener?" "Yes, and without being sent for." (n. 1,484 Bank of England Notes, 68,554 Gold, 28,089 Silver and Copper, . Ireland, having during the last twenty years reduced its population by nearly one half, is at this moment undergoing the process of still further reducing the num- ber of its inhabitants, so as exactly to suit the requirements of its landlords and of the English woollen manufacturers. . a week. If he come a few minutes late, he is punished; if he come 10 minutes late, he is not allowed to enter until after breakfast, and thus loses a quarter of a day's wage. 2 At the same time, the area under cultivation increased, from 1846 to 1856, by 464,119 acres, without reckoning the great area in the Eastern Counties which was transformed from rabbit warrens and poor pastures into magnificent corn-fields. The value of labour-power is determined, as in the case of every other commodity, by the labour-time necessary for the production, and consequently also the reproduction, of this 1 The capitalist epoch is therefore characterised by this, that labour power takes in the eyes of the labourer himself the form of a commodity which is his property; his labour consequently becomes wage-labour. Technology also discovered the few main funda- mental forms of motion, which, despite the diversity of the instru- ments used, are necessarily taken by every productive action of the human body; just as the science of mechanics sees in the most complicated machinery nothing but the continual repetition of the simple mechanical powers. But all methods for raising the social productive power of labour that are developed on this basis, are at the same time methods for the increased production of surplus- value or surplus-product, which in its turn is the formative element of accumulation. Engels, 1. But in the text we deal with that wear and tear, which no doctor can cure, and which little by little brings about death, with "that kind of wear which cannot be repaired from time to time, and which, in the case of a knife, would ultimately reduce it to a state in which the cut- ler would say of it, it is not worth a new blade." We have shewn in the text, that a machine takes part in every labour-process as an integral machine, but that into the simultaneous process of creating value it enters only bit by bit. At the same time arise large establishments for flax-spinning and weaving, in which the men "set free" now work for wages. is different in this table from that which appears in the preceding ones, because of certain deductions allowed by law. Oh o x 03 °3 s X, X « s » ^ U U Act U> H H ^ < MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 453 The enormous power, inherent in the factory system, of ex- panding by jumps, and the dependence of that system on the markets of the world, necessarily beget feverish production, followed by over-filling of the markets, whereupon contraction of the markets brings on crippling of production. of gold. A girl going past the house wakes me at half past five in the morning. The im- provements in the transmitting mechanism have lessened friction, and, what so strikingly distinguishes modern from the older ma- chinery, have reduced the diameter and weight of the shafting to a constantly decreasing minimum. According, therefore, as the measure of value is gold, silver, or copper, the value of the ton of iron will be expressed by very different prices, or will be represented by very different quantities of those metals respectively. Even in the coal and metal mines, labourers of both sexes, and all ages, are consumed, in perfect "freedom," at any period, and through any length of time. E. c, p. He says: "The yarn is of no use to me: I produced it for sale." In that case let him sell it, or, still better, let him for the future produce only things for satisfying his personal wants, a remedy that his phy- sician MacCulloch has already prescribed as infallible against an epidemic of over-production. c, pp. The isolated group of labourers to whom any particular detail function is assigned, is made up of homogeneous elements, and is one of the constituent parts of the total mechanism. Rent, £3 a year. This distinction is self-evident. of Fact.," 30th April, 1863, 1. The fact that half a day's labour is necessary to keep the labourer alive during 24 hours, does not in any way prevent him from working a whole day. The mech- anism that is made up of numerous individual detail labourers belongs to the capitalist. Work from 5 in the morning till 7 in the evening is consid- ered "reduced" and "moderate." Both boys and girls of 6 and even of 4 years of age are employed. 1 room 16 persons Lumley Street, No. 13 . The sum of money * which the labourer receives for his daily or weekly labour, forms the amount of his nominal wages, or of his wages estimated in value. I, book 1., chapter 1., pp. To become a commodity a product must be transferred to another, whom it will serve as a use-value, by means of an exchange.) 1 Lastly nothing can have value, without being an object of utility. 1 10 Hardy Street, No. 17 . Piece-work has, therefore, a tendency, while raising individual wages above the average, to lowei this average itself. Of 1 1 this value each article now has embodied in it^th, instead of^th, threepence instead of sixpence; or, what amounts to the same thing, only half an hour's instead of a whole hour's labour-time, is now added to the means of production while they are being transformed into each article. Com. c, p. It has been stated over and over again that the English doctors are unanimous in declaring that where the work is continuous, 500 cubic feet is the very least space that should be allowed for each person. 3 1. We left him just after he had purchased, in the open market, all the necessary factors of the labour-process; its objective factors, the means of production, as well as its subjective factor, labour-power. The second step, the process of production, is complete so soon as the means of produc- tion have been converted into commodities whose value exceeds that of their component parts, and, therefore, contains the capital originally advanced, plus a surplus-value. 476 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION the newly-constructed stoves for drying the ware in its green state, &c, are each events of great importance in the pottery art, and mark an advance which the preceding century could not rival. The many individual capitals invested in a particular branch of production have, one with another, more or l^ss different com- positions. Where this was the case, the corvee rarely arose from serfdom; serfdom much more frequently on the other hand took origin from the corvee. In the factory we have a lifeless mechanism independent of the workman, who becomes its mere living appendage. In the former, the supernumeraries of agriculture are transformed into factory operatives; in the latter, those forced into the towns, whilst at the same time they press on the wages 1 I. Nail-mak- THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 631 the magnitude of social capital already functioning, and the de- gree of its increase, with the extension of the scale of production, and the mass of the labourers set in motion, with the development of the productiveness of their labour, with the greater breadth and fulness of all sources of wealth, there is also an extension of the scale on which greater attraction of labourers by capital is accompanied by their greater repulsion; the rapidity of the change in the organic composition of capital, and in its technical form increases, and an increasing number of spheres of production be- comes involved in this change, now simultaneously, now alter- nately. In the few remarks I have still to make on this point, I shall refer to some actually existing relations, the existence of which our theoretical investigation has not yet disclosed. Practically, therefore, the only thing that interests him is the differ- ence between the price of labour-power and the value which its function creates. During this transition period, when the use of machinery is a sort of monopoly, the profits are therefore exceptional, and the capitalist endeavours to exploit thoroughly "the sunny time of this his first love," by prolonging the working- day as much as possible. * Census 1. walked two miles to their work." 2 This same Strand, a main thoroughfare which gives strangers an imposing idea of the wealth of London, may serve as an example of the packing together of human beings in that town. It is, therefore, in the early days of the life of ma- chinery that this special incentive to the prolongation of the work- ing-day makes itself felt most acutely. . 4 Price, 1. The total circulation of commodities in a given country during a given period is made up on the one hand of numerous isolated and simultaneous partial metamorphoses, sales which are at the same time purchases, in which each coin changes its place only once, or makes only one move; on the other hand, of numerous distinct series of metamorphoses partly running side by side, and partly coalescing with each other, in each of which series each coin makes a number of moves, the number being greater or less according to circumstances. We see, then, that labour is not the only source of material wealth, of use-values produced by labour. It increased to 267,671. Comm. Here, the process as a whole is examined objectively, in itself, that is to say, without regard to the question of its execu- tion by human hands, it is analysed into its constituent phases; and the problem, how to execute each detail process, and bind them all into a whole, is solved by the aid of machines, chemistry, &C 1 But, of course, in this case also, theory must be perfected by accumulated experience on a large scale. He would, besides, only require the means of production sufficient for 8 work- ing-hours. That is against our contract and the law of exchanges. (It will be seen from the preceding passage that the movement of the English agricultural proletariat, entirely crushed since the suppression of its violent manifestations after 1830. With suppressed irony, and in very well weighed words, the Factory Inspectors hint that the actual law also frees the capitalist from some of the brutality natural to a man who is a mere embodiment of capital, and that it has given him time for a little "culture." "Formerly the master had no time for anything but money; the servant had no time for anything but labour" (1. "Thirty years ago (1841) one spinner with three piecers was not required to attend to more than one pair of mules with 300-324 spindles. become independent landowners, if not competitors with their former masters in the labour-market." 3 Think of the horror! The excellent capitalist has imported bodily from Europe, with his own good money, his own competitors! The end of the world has come! No wonder Wakefield laments the absence of all dependence and of all sentiment of dependence on the part of the wage-workers in the colonies. XV., p. 81, n. Large proprietors 2 .... This being so, let us return to the formula C = c+v, which we saw was transformed into C'=(c+v)+s, C becoming C\ We know that the value of the constant capital is transferred to, and merely re-appears in the product. extensively in operation since the introduction of the combing-machine, especially Lister's ... As the number of the co-operating labourers increases, so too does their resistance to the domination of capital, and with it, the necessity for capital to overcome this resistance by counter- pressure. The trial of Warren Hastings swarms with such cases. 13.) CONSTANT CAPITAL AND VARIABLE CAPITAL 201 as being a concrete, useful process, that the same labour of spin- ning both transfers the values of the means of production to the product, and preserves them in the product. Altogether, Marx's book is not so much an investigation into capital, as a polemic against the present form of capital, a form which he confounds with the concept itself of capital."* ("Briefe, &c, von Dr. Rodbertus-Jagetzow, herausgg. More money is withdrawn from circulation at the finish than was thrown into it at the start. 2 Ure, 1. 6^7- d. The progressive fall in the value of the precious metals, and there- fore of money, brought the farmers golden fruit. Consequently, they must all change hands. 159. If instead of "gang" it were called "the Agricultural Juvenile Industrial Self-supporting Association," everything would be all right. 2 Especially by piece-work, a form we shall investigate in Part VI. It higgles over a meal-time, incorporat- ing it where possible with the process of production itself, so that food is given to the labourer as to a mere means of pro- duction, as coal is supplied to the boiler, grease and oil to the machinery. 1 Dr. Julian Hunter, in his epoch-making report on the dwellings of the agricultural labourers, says: "The cost of the hind" (a name for the agricultural labourer, inherited from the time of serfdom) "is fixed at the lowest possible amount on which he can live .... 4 The sporadic use of machinery in the 17th cen- tury was of the greatest importance, because it supplied the great mathematicians of that time with a practical basis and stimulant to the creation of the science of mechanics. Therefore, 10 lbs. Only in so far as paper money represents gold, which like all other commodities has value, is it a symbol of value. 1 And, in fact, their supposition appears the only one consonant with the laws of the production of commodities. While simple co-operation leaves the mode of working by the individual for the most part unchanged, manufacture thorough- ly revolutionises it, and seizes labour-power by its very roots. THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 661 had more than 50,000. In fact, the revolution i "Sixth Report on Public Health," Lond., 1864, p. Comm. * Here (from "The Tory Cabinet. It compels him to keep constantly extend- ing his capital, in order to preserve it, but extend it he cannot, except by means of progressive accumulation. LENGTH OF THE WORKING-DAY AND INTENSITY OF LABOUR CONSTANT, PRODUCTIVENESS OF LABOUR VARIABLE On these assumptions the value of labour-power, and the magnitude of surplus-value, are determined by three laws. The march of our analysis compels this splitting up of the subject-matter, a splitting up that is quite in keeping with the spirit of capitalist production. 1 Another "friendly" dodge was to make the adult males work 12 to 15 hours, and then to blazon abroad this fact as the best proof of what the proletariat desired in its heart of hearts. Econ.," Lond. Only it betrays its thoughts in that language with which alone it is familiar, the language of commodities. A commodity strips off its original commodity- form on being alienated, i.e., on the instant its use-value actually attracts the gold, that before existed only ideally in its price. of cotton absorbed six hours' labour, and became 10 lbs. For every 100 acres there is, on an average, scarcely one cottage. Among the attend- ants are reckoned more or less all "Feeders" who supply the ma- chines with the material to be worked. 2 The centralisation will, however, be best seen from a short analysis of the Income Tax Schedule D (profits, exclusive of farms, &c), in the years 1864 and 1865. That part of the Act of 1884 which was framed for securing uni- formity in the hours of work, ... But because this concrete labour, tailoring in our case, ranks as, and is directly identified with, undifferentiated human la- bour, it also ranks as identical with any other sort of labour, and therefore with that embodied in the linen. One portion of this product is consumed by the magnates in kind, another is converted, for their use, by the labourers, into articles of luxury and such like things; while the rest forms the wages of the labourers, who own their implements of labour. on Certain Verbal Disputes in Pol. passim.) 2 "Commodities (here used in the sense of use-values) are not the ter- minating object of the trading capitalist, money is his terminating object." (Th. Chalmers, "On Pol. By its adoption as money it received an additional value (une valeur addi- tionnelle)". During the 15 hours of the factory day, capital dragged in the labourer now for 30 minutes, now for an hour, and then pushed him out again, to drag him into the factory and to thrust him out afresh, hounding him hither and thither, in scat- tered shreds of time, without ever losing hold of him until the full 10 hours' work was done. 2 "No child under 12 years of age shall be employed in any manufactur- ing establishment more than 10 hours in one day." General Statutes of Mas- sachusetts, 63, ch. To assume that there is an invariable ratio between the quantities of gold and silver in which a given quantity of labour-time is incorporated, is to assume, in fact, that gold and silver are of one and the same material, and that a given mass of the less valuable metal, silver, is a constant fraction of a given mass of gold. c, p. (e.) The British Agricultural Proletariat Nowhere does the antagonistic character of capitalistic pro- duction and accumulation assert itself more brutally than in the progress of English agriculture (including cattle-breeding) and the retrogression of the English agricultural labourer. 67-82. will produce a daily surplus-value of 300s., and one of n times 3s. 19, 20. . This first period, during which machinery con- quers its field of action, is of decisive importance owing to the ex- traordinary profits that it helps to produce. 238. "The whole employment is at this time in a state of transition, and is undergoing the same change as that effected in the lace trade, weaving, &c." (i. 'Johnson. 17, 14.) 2 To one of these gentlemen the taste of his rent was so grateful that he indignantly declared to the Commission of Inquiry that the whole hubbub was only due to the name of the system. They are allotted respectively to the two different commodities brought into relation by that expression. 44, 46. What, however, characterises him as the political economist par excellence of the period of Manufacture, is the stress he lays on division of labour. de Mandeville's Remarks to his "Fable of the Bees, or Private Vices, Pub- lick Benefits." (First ed., without the remarks, 1706; with the remarks, 1714.) 1 "There is no longer anything which we can call the natural reward of individual labour. The circulation of commodities differs from the direct ex- change of products (barter), not only in form, but in substance. At the end of 1866 and the beginning of 1867, one of the Irish land magnates, Lord Dufferin, set about its solution in The Times. c, p. 36.) 3 "Ou bien, il faut consentir a dire qu'une valeur d un million en ar- gent vaut plus qu'une valeur egale en marchandises." (Le Trosne, 1. 2 William Wood, 9 years old, was 7 years and 10 months when he began to work. .... Private property, as the antithesis to social, collective property, exists only where the means of labour and the external conditions of labour belong to private individuals. And ... It cannot be denied that John Stuart Mill owes his, at all events, "remarkable" authority almost entirely to such quid-pro-quos. It is also a perfectly correct method: being in fact the first method given above with this difference, that instead of being applied to space, in which the different parts of the completed product lie side by side, it deals with time, in which those parts are successively produced. "The application of power to the process of combing wool ... Threatened in thier holiest interest, 1 "Rept. . Senior, in his posthumous work, al- ready quoted, terms "the proceedings in Sutherlandshire one of the most beneficent clearings since the memory of man." (1. m. There would be an alteration, not in the length of the working-day, but in its division into necessary labour-time and surplus labour-time. And money serves as a means of purchase by realising the price of the commodity. 1846. The law, that the quantity of the circulating medium is determined by the sum of the prices of the commodities circu- lating, and the average velocity of currency 1 may also be stated as follows: given the sum of the values of commodities, and the average rapidity of their metamorphoses, the quantity of pre- cious metal current as money depends on the value of that precious metal. By degrees more is produced and more consumed, and consequently more products have to be converted into means of production. m., but also of making them hunger during that time. employed in the details of the work." (1. In it the genesis of the "capitalist farmer" or "merchant farmer," as he is explicitly called, may be studied, and his self-glorification at the expense of the small farmer who has only to do with bare subsistence, be noted. If we take this, together with the swift, unbroken extension of the markets, viz., the towns, and the reign of Free-trade, then the agricultural labourer was at last, post tot discrimina rerum, placed in circumstances that ought, secundum artem, to have made him drunk with happiness. The majority of the men themselves cannot." (ns. . Now the quantity of gold which the circulation can absorb, constantly fluctuates about a given level. 4 2s. In France, where the expropriation was effected in another way, the ordonnance of Moulins, 1571, and the Edict of 1656, correspond to the English poor-laws. 74.) 154 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION itself by throwing of! surplus-value from itself; the original value, in other words, expands spontaneously. This mode oi production pre-sup- poses parcelling of the soil, and scattering of the other means of production. This inequality of the sexes was partly remedied in 1861, when they numbered 98 males and 87 fe- males; increase in 10 years of 14 men and 33 women. The ever repeated purchase and sale of labour-power is now the mere form; what really takes place is this — the capital- ist again and again appropriates, without equivalent, a portion of the previously materialised labour of others, and exchanges it for a greater quantity of living labour. 1 1 This is one of the circumstances that makes production by slave la- bour such a costly process. (n. Just as commodities are, at the same time, use-values and values, so the process of pro* ducing them must be a labour-process, and at the same time, a process of creating value. The statutory pauses in the working-day, moreover, imply the assumption that periodical and sudden cessation of the work does no harm to the article undergoing the process of production. 2 It is no longer a mere accident, that capitalist and labourer confront each other in the market as buyer and seller. gg2 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION been in very rapid increase, and the household circumstances of the labourer are now in the highest degree deplorable. La valeur du travail est une expression figuree, " &c, I have re- marked: "Dans le travail-marchandise qui est d'une realite effrayante, il (Proudhon) ne voit qu'une ellipse grammaticale. 2 "So much weight of cotton is delivered to him [the spinner], and he has to return by a certain time, in lieu of it, a given weight of twist or yarn, of a certain degree of fineness, and he is paid so much per pound for all that he so returns. 55 and 56. In moving the colossal statues and vast masses of which the transport creates wonder, human labour almost alone, was prodigally used.... 1 Since the passing of the first Factory Act half a century had elapsed. Senior") the English text has been altered in conformity with the 4th German edition. The ground would pasture 15,000 sheep, and as it was not more than one-thirtieth part of the old forest ground in Scotland ... first spun. Urquhart: "Familiar Words." Lond., 1855, p. Therefore, if a state run most to noblemen and gentlemen, and that the husbandmen and ploughmen be but as their workfolk and labourers, or else mere cottagers (which are but hous'd beggars), you may have a good cavalry, but never good stable bands of foot.... The surplus-produce increased, al- though the total produce, of which it formed a fraction, decreased. "Mankind have adopted a . The chain of which each equation of value is a link, is liable at any moment to be lengthened by each new kind of commodity that comes into existence and furnishes the material for a fresh expression of value. of tea =20 yards of linen, and 40 lbs. Report of the Committee." Manchester, 1854, p. From what has been said, it is manifest, that, in a free nation, where slaves are not allowed of, the surest wealth consists in a multitude of laborious poor; for besides, that they are the never-failing nursery of fleets and armies, without them there could be no enjoyment, and no product of any country could be valuable."To make the society" [which of course consists of non-workers] "happy and people easier under the meanest circumstances, it is requisite that great numbers of them should be ignorant as well as poor; knowledge both enlarges and multiplies our desires, and the fewer things a man wishes for, the more easily his necessities may be supplied." 1 What Mande- ville, an honest, clear-headed man, had not yet seen, is that the mechanism of the process of accumulation itself increases, along with the capital, the mass of "labouring poor," i.e., the wage- labourers, who turn their labour-power into an increasing power of self-expansion of the growing capital, and even by doing so must eternise their dependent relation on their own product, as personified in the capitalists. It employs two sorts of labour- ers, one grown up, tenters, the other, boys mostly from 11 to 17 years of age whose sole business is either to spread the sheets of paper under the machine, or to take from it the printed sheets. For instance, the pumps with which the Dutch, in 1836-7, emptied the Lake of Harlem, were constructed on the principle of ordinary pumps; the only difference being, that their pistons were driven by Cy- clopean steam-engines, instead of by men. This will always be diminished when the necessaries of life grow cheaper." (1. The over- production of sewing-machines themselves, causes their pro- ducers, in bad want of a sale, to let them out for so much a week, thus crushing by their deadly competition the small owners of 1 "The rental of premises required or workrooms seems the element which ultimately determines the point; and consequently it is in the met- ropolis, that the old system of giving work out to small employers and fami- lies has been longest retained, and earliest returned to." (1. 590 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION viz., that "the part of revenue, of which it is said, it has been added to capital, is consumed by productive labourers." According to this, all surplus-value that is changed into capital becomes vari- able capital. The general form of relative value, embracing the whole world of commodities, converts the single commodity that is excluded from the rest, and made to play the part of equivalent — here the linen— into the universal equivalent. 86, note.) In explanation it should he stated, that in Scotland, at the dateof Fullarton'swork, notes and not cheques were used to withdraw deposits. Their wages, he says, "were not more than enough for the absolute necessaries of life." Let us hear for a moment a defender of enclosures and an opponent of Dr. Price. It is clearly the result of a past historical development, the product of many economic revolutions, of the extinction of a whole series of older forms of social production. Of course he can, like his labourer, take to work himself, participate directly in the process of production, but he is then only a hybrid between capitalist and labourer, a "small mas- ter." A certain stage of capitalist production necessitates that the capitalist be able to devote the whole of the time during which he functions as a capitalist, i.e., as personified capital, to the appro- priation and therefore control of the labour of others, and to the sell- ing of the products of this labour. Occupied with the difference between the market-price of labour and its so-called value, with the relation of this value to the rate of profit, and to the values of the commodities produced by means of labour, &c, they never discovered that the course of the analy- sis had led not only from the market-prices of labour to its presumed value, but had led to the resolution of this value of labour itself into the value of labour-power. another great cause to which the bad constitutions of the potters are to he attributed." ("Child Empl. The latter also were practically at the same time peasant farmers, since, besides their wages, they had allotted to them arable land to the extent of 4 or more acres, together with their cottages. But the variable capital of a capitalist is the expression in money of the total value of all the labour-powers that he employs simultaneously. First, those able to work. were flogged, fettered and tortured in the most exquisite refinement of cruelty; . 2 In the Compte Rendu of the International Statistical Congress at Paris, 1855, it is stated: "The French law, which limits the length of daily labour in factories and workshops to 12 hours, does not confine this work to definite fixed hours. But in his middle- class he includes people that live on the interest of small investments, offi- cials, men of letters, artists, schoolmasters and the like, and in order to swell the number he also includes in these 4,650,000 the better paid portion of the factory operatives! The bricklayers, too, figure amongst them. . 1663-1667). "The fourth period," the last 30 years of the 18th century, "is that in which expense and luxury have made great progress, and was supported by a trade extended by means of riders and factors through every part of Europe." x What would the good Dr. Aikin say if he could rise from his grave and see the Manchester of to-day? The cheapest house in Dun- ton, 15 feet long externally, 10 broad, let for £3. Empl. c, p. Then followed a further reduction of 8-^-% as soon as the working-day was shortened to 11, and a reduc- tion of double that amount as soon as it was finally shortened to 10 hours. The ground-rents are high, as they are general- ly where population is dense. This concrete labour becomes, therefore, the medium for expressing abstract human labour. 1 Again, money functions as a means of circulation only because in it the values of commodities have independent reality. which the working of the Ten Hours' Act has brought to light." ("Rep. v 35.) 2 "Rep. . Therefore, first: the valid exchange-values of a given commodity express something equal; secondly, exchange-value, generally, is only the mode of expression, the phenomenal form, of something contained in it, yet distinguishable from it. The special skill of each individual insignificant factory operative vanishes as an infinitesimal quantity before the science, the gigantic physical forces, and the mass of la- bour that are embodied in the factory mechanism and, together with that mechanism, constitute the power of the "master." This "master," therefore, in whose brain the machinery and his mo- nopoly of it are inseparably united, whenever he falls out with his "hands," contemptuously tells them: "The factory operatives should keep in wholesome remembrance the fact that theirs is really a low species of skilled labour; and that there is none which is more easily acquired, or of its quality more amply remunerated, or which by a short training of the least expert can be more quickly, as well as abundantly, acquired. E.\ 338 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION and only one, of the constituent partial operations. But this contest at first takes place more between the large and the small landed proprietors, than be- tween capital and wage-labour; on the other hand, when the labour- ers are displaced by the instruments of labour, by sheep, horses, &c, in this case force is directly resorted to in the first instance as the prelude to the industrial revolution. In the extractive industries, mines, &c, the raw materials form no part of the capital advanced. 56, par. 134. Cseteris paribus, the ratio of these parts determines the magnitude of the accumulation. Its existence as a material thing is put out of sight. SECTION 3.— SEPARATION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO CAPITAL AND REVENUE. i, ch. 3.) 3 The following shows how such times are exploited by the "amis du commerce." "On one occasion (1839) an old grasping banker (in the city) MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OF COMMODITIES 139 If we now consider the sum total of the money current dur- ing a given period, we shall find that, given the rapidity of cur- rency of the circulating medium and of the means of payment, it is equal to the sum of the prices to be realised, plus the sum of the payments falling due, minus the payments that balance each other, minus finally the number of circuits in which the same piece of coin serves in turn as means of circulation and of payment. But from the small proportion of boys that we em- ploy, the subject (i.e., of restrictions on night-work) is of little importance or interest to us." 1 Mr. J. c, p. Opdyke: "A Treatise on Polit. The agricultural labourer is therefore reduced to the minimum of wages, and always stands with one foot already in the swamp of pauperism. . The commodity to be exchanged may possibly be the product of some new kind of labour, that pretends to satisfy newly arisen requirements, or even to give rise itself to new requirements. Yet it is what we do every day. Simultaneously, with the differ- entiation of the instruments of labour, the industries that produce these instruments, become more and more differentiated. If in consequence of a new invention, machinery of a particular kind can be produced by a diminished expenditure of labour, the old machinery becomes depreciated more or less, and conse- quently transfers so much less value to the product. Contrariwise, the movement of the means of payment expresses a social relation that was in existence long before. By this action it destroys at the same time the health of the town labourer and the intellectual life of the rural labourer. One example (it- has reference to the crisis in the Coventry silk weaving): "From information I have received from manufacturers as well as workmen, there seems to be no doubt that wages have been reduced to a greater extent than either the competition of the foreign producers, or other circumstances have rendered necessary . In the rear of that industry, the traditional form of manufacture, of handicraft, and of domestic industry, is entirely revolutionised; manufactures are constantly passing into the factory system, and handicrafts into manufactures; and lastly, the spheres of handicraft and of the domestic industries become, in a, comparatively speaking, wonderfully short time, dens of misery in which capitalistic exploitation obtains free play for the wildest excesses. 5. c, p. m.), and he has to work hard all the time to get lid. Hence, in order to get rid of the product of one working-day, the demand must be double what it was, i.e., the market must become twice as extensive. She died. I therefore call it the variable part of capital, or, shortly, variable capital. Since, before entering on the process, his own labour has already been alienated from himself by the sale of his SIMPLE REPRODUCTION 571 labour-power, has been appropriated by the capitalist and incor- porated with capital, it must, during the process, be realised in a product that does not belong to him. 368-370. Rep.," p. This sort of work is given out 1 "Gh. Empl. m. The product belongs exclusively to the capitalist, who sup- plied the raw "material and the necessaries of life; and this is a rigorous con- sequence of the law of appropriation, a law whose fundamental principle was the very opposite, namely, that every labourer has an exclusive right to the ownership of what he produces." (1. 2 "Rep. CAPITALIST PRODUCTION gradually establishes itself. Its fragments fall to various categories of persons, and take various forms, independent the one of the other, such as profit, interest, merchants' profit, rent, &c. But the production of machinery by machinery lessens its value relatively to its extension and effi- cacy. Now, let us cast a glance at certain branches of production in which the exploita- tion of labour is either free from fetters to this day, or was so yesterday. So soon as it attains some consistence and extension, it becomes the rec- ognised methodical and systematic form of capitalist production. Report," Lond., 1866, p. they fulfil the provisions of the statutes by allowing an hour before 9 a. 8 These figures are sufficient for comparison, but, taken absolutely, are false, since perhaps, £100,000,000 of income are annually not declared. III., p. The latter process requires something more than a good stomach. We heard how over- work thinned the ranks of the bakers in London. The total product of our community is a social product. per hour. . The pivot of these crises is to be found in moneyed capi- tal, and their sphere of direct action is therefore the sphere of that capital, viz., banking, the stock exchange, and finance. . It proclaimed surplus-value making as the sole end and aim of humanity. Hence, when we bring the products of our labour into rela- tion with each other as values, it is not because we see in these articles the material receptacles of homogeneous human labour. Nay, this very loom, though a tool when worked by hand, would, if worked by steam, be a machine. It becomes plain, that it is not the exchange of commodities which regulates the magnitude of their value; but, on the contrary, that it is the magnitude of their value which controls their exchange proportions. and even the enclosure of waste lands (as now carried on) bears hard on the poor, by depriving them of a part of their subsistence, and only goes towards increasing farms already too large." 2 "When," says Dr. Price, "this land gets into the hands of a few great farmers, the consequence must be that the little farmers" (earlier designated by him "a multitude of little proprietors and tenants, who maintain themselves and families by the produce of the ground they occupy by sheep kept on a common, by poul- try, hogs, &c, and who therefore have little occasion to purchase any of the means of subsistence") "will be converted into a body of men who earn their subsistence by working for others, and who will be under a necessity of going to market for all they want. Some part of the work is very hard; some of these girls have raised as much as 10 tons of stuff a day." (ns. 2 "The Acts of last Session (1864) ... 2 A point that Sir James Steuart emphasises. When he met with honest men whom he liked... In so far as the "Contrariwise, in the process M — G, the money can be alienated as a real means of purchase, and in that way, the price of the commodity can be realised before the use-value of the money is realised and the commodity actually delivered. A Manchester manufacturer states: "We formerly had 75 carding engines, now we have 12, doing the same quantity of work. With the churka invented some years ago by Dr. Forbes, one man and a boy produce 250 lbs. a ton, amounts to about £4y a week: gas, £1 a week, oil, &c, £4^- a week. But, on the other hand, his activity now confined in one groove, assumes the form best adapted to the narrowed sphere of action. This observation is made for the purpose of explaining various citations in the subsequent pages. It will soon be learnt from experience that tinkering of this sort is of no use. But the rate of profit ^=|i^=20%. On the other hand, if the mass of labour-power employed, or the amount of variable capital, increases, but not in proportion to the fall in the rate of surplus-value, the mass of the surplus-value produced, falls. In this direction, the shortening of the work- ing-day finds at last a limit in the generalisation of labour. a week, and receiving from this poor hind £4 THE OENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 685 ing no fire-grate, no privy, no opening window, no water supply but the ditch, no garden — but the labourer is helpless against the wrong. 5. all this falls under the idea of a tool; but the plough, which is drawn by animal power, and wind-mills, &c, must be classed among machines." (Wilhelm Schulz: "Die Bewegung der Produktion." Zurich, 1843, p. 3 The Act of 1844 certainly "robbed" them of the "liberty" of employing children under 11 longer than 6— hours a day. Machinery, by throwing every member of that family on to the labour-market, spreads the value of the man's labour-power over his whole family. c, p. 2 1 Eden, 1. This circumstance has given rise to the wildest theories. "Had it not been for the violent collisions and interruptions resulting from erroneous views among the factory operatives, the factory system would have been developed still more rapidly and beneficially for all concerned." Then he exclaims again: "Fortunately for the state of society in the cotton districts of Great Britain, the improve- ments in machinery are gradual." "It" (improvement in machin- ery) "is said to lower the rate of earnings of adults by displac- ing a portion of them, and thus rendering their number super- abundant as compared with the demand for their labour. . have been known for many years .... To reduce the long trudges over these wide plains, the beau- tiful pastures of Leicester and Northampton, the shepherd used to get a cot- tage on the farm. It also enters as raw ma- terial into its own production in the shape of seed; coal, too, is at the same time the product of, and a means of production in, coal-mining. 1 Such quantitative determination of its relative value takes bol; the article counts not for what it is, but for what it is worth." (Hegel, 1. However rapid reproduction may be, it takes, at all events, the space of a gener- ation to replace the loss of adult labour. the par- tition of a process into its essential constituents, for the division or gradua- tion of labour among artisans." (Andrew Ure: "The Philosophy of Manufac- tures," Lond., 1835, p. The value of the linen can therefore be expressed only relatively — i.e., in some other com- modity. m., ... . THE WORKING-DAY 295 male operatives. . CO-OPERATION 325 sumed in common, they give up a smaller part of their value to each single product; partly because the total value they part with is spread over a greater quantity of products, and partly because their value, though absolutely greater, is, having regard to their sphere of action in the process, relatively less than the value of isolated means of production. (Prof, of Polit. 16. The improvements in the steam-engine have increased the piston speed, and at the same time have made it possible, by means of a greater economy of power, to drive with the same or even a smaller con- sumption of coal more machinery with the same engine. In the course of this development, the formal subjection is replaced by the real subjection of labour to capital. Since, on the other hand, no rise or fall in the value of an ounce of gold can alter its weight, no alteration can take place in the weight of its aliquot parts. For the present I will only say this: The labourers that are thrown out of work in any branch of industry, can no doubt seek for employment in some other branch. Finally, it is a systematic process, which does not simply make a passing gap in the population, but sucks out of it every year more people than are replaced by the births, so that the ab- solute level of the population falls year by year. The first condition of accumulation is that the capitalist must have contrived to sell his commodities, and to reconvert into cap- ital the greater part of the money so received. 1839-44, v. If then we treat this mode of production as one eternally fixed by Nature for every state of society, we necessarily overlook that which is the differ- entia specifica of the value-form, and consequently of the commodity-form, and of its further developments, money-form, capital-form, &c. for the Netherlands (October, 1537), the first edict of the States and Towns of Holland (March 10, 1614), the "Plakaat" of the United Provinces (June 26, 1649), &c. If, for instance, we have yj^— ^-. I., I. His successors, Boultonand Watt, sent to the exhi- bition of 1851 steam-engines of colossal size for ocean steamers. It is impossible for them to rise or fall simultaneously. So the usurer would deceive the world, as though he were of use and gave the world oxen, which he, however, rends, and eats all alone... 2 1. In the history of primitive accumulation, all revolutions are epoch-making that act as levers for the capitalist class in course of formation; but, above all, those moments when great masses of men are suddenly and forcibly torn from their means of sub- sistence, and hurled as free and "unattached" proletarians on the labour-market. For this work I get 10s. The production of commodities, their circulation, and that more developed form of their circulation called commerce, these form the historical ground-work from which it rises. c, ed. Ought it to expend a part of the public money in the attempt to confound and blend together two classes of labour, which are striving after division and separation?" 1 Some crippling of body and mind is inseparable even from division of labour in society as a whole. m. •2T g. F. On the other hand, Don Quixote long ago paid the penalty for wrongly imagining that knight errantry was compatible with all economic forms of society. Econ." London, 1830, p. However, about that time, or a little later, the traders had got money beforehand, and began to build modern brick houses, in- stead of those of wood and plaster." Even in the early part of the 18th century, a Manchester manufacturer, who placed a pint of foreign wine before his guests, exposed himself to the remarks and headshakings of all his neighbours. c, p. 605 . Each man would want half of this profit." In other words, Messrs. By this means alone can he avoid renouncing his rights of ownership over it. MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 401 doubt as to her unfitness to teach. The annual return of that mill, supposing the capital to be turned once -a year, and gross profits to be 15 percent., ought to be goods worth THE RATE OP SURPLUS-VALUE 225 £115,000.... The quantity of the cir- culating medium may decrease, owing to the number of commodi- ties decreasing more rapidly; or to the velocity of currency increas- ing more rapidly, than prices rise. On the other hand, it accomplishes this social organisation of the labour-process only by riveting each labourer to a single fractional detail. 1 Whilst the place of the independent yeoman was taken by tenants at will, small farmers on yearly leases, a servile rabble dependent on the pleasure of the landlords, the systematic rob- bery of the Communal lands helped especially, next to the theft of the State domains, to swell those large farms, that were called in the 18th century capital farms 2 or merchant farms, 3 and to "set free" the agricultural population as proletarians for manu- facturing industry. "Do you think that further experiments ought to be made in order to ascertain whether a dietary might not be hit upon for prisoners employed on public works nearly approaching to the dietary of free labourers?'' 3 . 1 were 2,694 gamekeepers (for the landlords' preserves), in 1869 there were 4,921. 4 tendencies, it would be very wrong to class Ihem with the herd ol vulgar economic apologists. Hence is it that in the history of capi- talist production, the determination of what is a working-day, presents itself as the result of a struggle, a struggle between col- lective capital, i.e., the class of capitalists, and collective labour, i.e., the working-class. By a Fellow of the University College of Oxford,** London, 1815. Mr. Baynes, of Blackburn, in a lecture published in 1858, estimates that "each real mechanical horse-power 2 will drive 450 1 Ricardo lays such stress on this effect of machinery (of which, in other connexions, he takes no more notice than he does of the general distinc- tion between the labour process and the process of creating surplus-value), that he occasionally loses sight of the value given up by machines to the prod- uct, and puts machines on the same looting as natural forces. Why, how much worse is it than the intention of the Moguls, who, when they had bro- ken into the northern provinces of China, proposed in council to exterminate the inhabitants, and convert the land into pasture. In a work, which, ex professo, treats of "trade" and "speculation," occurs the following: "All trade consists in the exchange of things of different kinds; and the advantage" (to the mer- chant?) "arises out of this difference. 15 Of these, 30,501 are females. THEIR GENERAL EXTENSION IN ENGLAND Factory legislation, that first conscious and methodical re- action of society against the spontaneously developed form of the process of production, is, as we have seen, just as much the necessary product of modern industry as cotton yarn, self-actors, and the electric telegraph. The former gives the finishing touches to the machine-made lace, and includes numerous sub-divisions. They sent round to all the different banks to borrow, but could not get them, and many of the transactions were adjusted by slips of paper only; yet by three o'clock the whole of the notes were returned into the banks from which they had issued! It was a mere transfer from hand to hand." Although Hie average effective circulation of bank-notes in Scotland is less than three millions sterling, yet on certain pay days in the year, every single note in the possession of the bankers, amounting in the whole to about £7,000,000, is called into activity. of yarn produced, it follows that the various component parts of this value, can be represented as being contained respectively in corresponding parts of the product. of Insp. 22.) SIMPLE REPRODUCTION 569 as means of production, and transfer their value to the product. But even in Modern Industry the continual improvement of machin- ery, and the development of the automatic system, has an anal- ogous effect. The peasant, expropriated and cast adrift, must buy their value in the form of wages, from liis new master, the industrial capitalist. On the other hand, the imaginary price-form may some- times conceal either a direct or indirect real value-relation; for in- stance, the price of uncultivated land, which is without value, because no human labour has been incorporated in it. And this the apologist calls a compensation for the misery, the sufferings, the possible death of the displaced labourers 640 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION during the transition period that banishes them into the indus- trial reserve army! The demand for labour is not identical with increase of capital, nor supply of labour with increase of the work- ing-class. MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSRY 469 In 1861, there were 40,043 persons employed in straw-plaiting and straw-hat making; of these 3,815 were males of all ages, the rest females, of whom 14,913, including about 7,000 children, were under 20 years of age. A close scrutiny of the expression of the value of A in terms of B, contained in the equation expressing the value-relation of A to B, has shown us that, within that relation, the bodily form of A figures only as a use-value, the bodily form of B only as the form or aspect of value. 9— d., shoemakers 2s. of blown-flint glass, now produces in its place 3,000,500 lbs. The price of the cotton in April, 1871, was 7-r- d. The reasoning is quite worthy of the man who first declared the relations of capitalist production to be eternal laws of Nature and reason, whose free, harmonious working is only disturbed by the intervention of the State, in or- der afterwards to discover that the diabolical influence of England on the world-market (an influence, which, it appears, does not spring from the natural laws of capitalist production) necessitates State intervention, i.e., the protection of those laws of Nature and reason by the State, alias the System of Protection. We wish to part with a useless thing, in order to get one that we need; we want to give less for more. 1 The price of labour-time itself is finally determined by the equation; value of a day's labour= daily value of labour-power. 483. Darwin has interested us in the history of Nature's Technol- ogy, »•«•! in the formation of the organs of plants and animals, which or- gans serve as instruments of production for sustaining life. 110. . In the inverted form, M— G— M, on the contrary, the buyer lays out money in order that, as a seller, he may recover money. This sum is greater than the sum in which average social labour of the same kind is expressed: twelve hours of the latter labour are expressed by six shillings only. Not only the labour, but also the raw material and the product now appear in quite a new light, very different from that in which we viewed them in the labour-process pure and simple. Modern Industry, indeed, compels society, under pen- alty of death, to replace the detail-worker of to-day, crippled by life-long repetition of one and the same trivial operation, and thus reduced to the mere fragment of a man, by the fully developed individual, fit for a variety of labours, ready to face any change of production, and to whom the different social functions he per- forms, are but so many modes of giving free scope to his own natu- ral and acquired powers. In not less than 22 parishes, however, the destruction of houses has not prevent- ed increase of population, or has not brought about that expul- sion which, under the name "migration to towns," generally oc- curs. The chief industries of this kind are, at present, gas-works, telegraphs, photography, steam nav- igation, and railways. (See John Fullarton, "Regu- lation of Currencies." Lond. 2 Moreover, the co-op- eration of wage-labourers is entirely brought about by the capital that employs them. Then he turns round and seeks to reform the actual production of commodities, and the actual legal system corresponding thereto, in accordance with this ideal. I believe that a woman having children (and there are plenty on the banks that have) cannot do her duty to her chil- dren." (ns. Every labourer belongs to it during the time when he is only partially employed or wholly unemployed. A daughter came home from service with scarlet fever. — Note by the Institute of Marxism- Leninism in the Russian edition. c, pp. c, p. His un- fortunate situation will fully appear, by taking a comparative view of it, only forty years ago, and at present. On a vu les simples travailleurs exploiter a leur tour les entrepreneurs d'industrie, exiger d'eux des salaires hors de toute pro- portion avec la part legitime qui leur revenait dans le produit. The needlemaker of the Nuremberg Guild was the corner- stone on which the English needle manufacture was raised. The composition of capital is to be understood in a two-fold sense. Econ.," p. These small manufacturers mostly went to the wall. Further, wages after the war were higher than in the following century." (G. This mass is given technologically. We shall now lightly touch upon the relation between the division of labour in manufacture, 1 Dr. Ure, in his apotheosis of Modern Mechanical Industry, brings out the peculiar character of manufacture more sharply than previous econ- omists, who had not his polemical interest in the matter, and more sharply even than his contemporaries — Babbage, e.g., who, though much his superior as a mathematician and mechanician, treated mechanical industry from the standpoint of manufacture alone Ure says, "This appropriation ... If we really exchanged equal values, neither party could make a profit. A comparison of it with the said Swiss federal law is of particular interest because it clearly demonstrates the merits and demerits of the two legislative methods— the English, "historical" method, which in- tervenes when occasion requires, and the continental method, which is built up on the traditions of the French Revolution and generalises more. &c. of yarn. 20.) MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 381 from one phase to another is effected, not by the hand of man, but by the machinery itself. The connexion between the paid and the unpaid labour is destroyed. No wonder therefore, that England, at the end of the 16th century, had a class of capitalist farmers, rich, con- sidering the circumstances of the time. If, further, the rate of surplus-value be =100%, this vari- able capital of 3s. But from this we see how capital, for the purposes of its self-expansion, has usurped the labour necessary in the home of the family. On the other hand, they must show that they are use-values before they can be realised as values. 37, 43 passim. Ixvii). In order that the family may live, four people must now, not only labour, but expend surplus- labour for the capitalist. . Total yearly income f 4,368,610 divided among 17,467 persons. But it is only in so far as he ultimately contributes to this result, that he assists in rais- ing the general rate of surplus-value. Starting from this basis, Storch naively con- fesses, "II est impossible de resoudre le prix necessaire dans ses elements les plus simples." (Storch, I.e., Petersb. 141, note.) A fine science of economy this, which declares it impossible to resolve the price of a commodity into its simplest elements! This point will be further investi- gated in the seventh part of Book iii. c, p. When this term is once reached, only a very small number continue to find employment in the same branches of industry, whilst the majority are regularly discharged. The whole working-day then amounts to 12 hours and is embodied in a value of 6 shillings. And what, if you please, is this "legitimate part," which on your own showing the capitalist in Europe daily neglects to pay? Rep.," p. The money they had advanced to the plebeian debtor had been transformed via the means of subsistence into the flesh and blood of the debtor. same Lime as a single pin might have been either cut or pointed." (Dugald Stewart, 1. dren than otherwise, believing that idleness is the parent of vice." On this the factory report of 31st Oct., 1848, says: The atmosphere of the flax mills, in which the children of these virtuous and tender parents work, is so loaded with dust and fibre from the raw material, that it is exceptionally unpleas- ant to stand even 10 minutes in the spinning rooms: for you are unable to do so without the most painful sensation, owing to the eyes, the ears, the nostrils, and mouth, being immediately filled by the clouds of flax dust from which there is no escape. One sort of commodity may be born on its own market place, another has to make a long journey to market. 2 1 The Labour Statutes, the like of which were enacted at the same time in France, the Netherlands, and elsewhere, were first formally repealed in England in 1813, long after the changes in methods of production had ren- dered them obsolete. 1 "A family of four grown-up persons, with two children as winders, earned at the end of the last, and the beginning of the present century, by ten hours' daily labour, £4 a week. iii.. 1, p. DIVISION OP LABOUR AND MANUFACTURE 361 ist's workshop. Thus, apart from the dearness of the machines made in this way, a circumstance that is ever present to the mind of the capitalist, the expansion of industries carried on by means of machinery, and the invasion by machinery of fresh branches of production, were dependent on the growth of a class of workmen, MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 383 who, owing to the almost artistic nature of their employment, could increase their numbers only gradually, and not by leaps and bounds. Working-day II. 2,046 152 12 1861 2,715 163 9 1868 2,405 131 13 United Kingdom . Is 6-J-d. Ch. xxi., pp. First, when manu- facturers were obliged to work hard for their livelihood." They enriched themselves chiefly by robbing the parents, whose chil- dren were bound as apprentices to them: the parents paid a high premium, while the apprentices were starved. Were that the case, the cup of surplus- value would be drained to the very dregs, and nothing but simple reproduction would ever take place. But still, even then, the intensity of labour would be different in different countries, and would modify the international application of the law of value. The pack- ing together of knots of men in scattered little villages and small country towns corresponds to the forcible draining of men from the surface of the land. Say says: "Les epargnes des riches se font aux depens des pauvres." "The Roman proletarian lived almost entirely at the expense of society.... On the other, the official statistics become more and more misleading as to the actual extent of pau- perism in proportion as, with the accumulation of capital, the class-struggle, and, therefore, the class-consciousness of the working-men, develop. Here there are not two workmen to each horse-power. . . is true that with the substitution of manufacture for handicrafts, traces of the exploitation of children begin to appear. And it appears to revolve about money, for money is the beginning and end of this kind of exchange (to vap vojjLtCTjxat oTot/elov xai rapci; t9j<; dMarprj<; ka~(v). Danielson (Nikolai— on) Marx proposed that this sentence be corrected to read as follows: "And, as a matter of fact, the value of each single yard is but the materialised form of a part of the social labour expended on the whole number of yards." An analogous correction was made in a copy of the second German edition of the first volume of "Capital" belonging to Marx; however, not in his hand- writing. . c, p. The mining districts attract with rapidity a large population, made up of the miners them- selves, and the artisans, shopkeepers, &c, that group themselves around them. Nevertheless, the capitalist may, for a moment, speak for himself. Many of the smaller branches are not included in these figures. The Irish- man, banished by sheep and ox, re-appears on the other side of the ocean as a Fenian, and face to face with the old queen of the seas rises, threatening and more threatening, the young giant Republic: Acerba fata Romanos agunt Scelusque fraternae necis. But the greater this reserve army in proportion to the active labour- army, the greater is the mass of a consolidated surplus-popula- tion, whose misery is in inverse ratio to its torment of labour. The greater part of them in fact return to the country, and especially in cases of severe illness. After this reduction to the same terms of the day-wages, time-wage must again be translated into piece-wage, as the latter only can be a measure both of the productivity and the intensity of labour. The majority of the "over-timers" de- clared: "They would much prefer working ten hours for less wages, but that they had no choice; that so many were out of employment (so many spinners getting very low wages by having to work as piecers, being unable to do better), that if they refused to work the longer time, others would immedi- ately get their places, so that it was a question with them of agreeing to work the longer time, or of being thrown out of em- ployment altogether." 2 The preliminary campaign of capital thus came to grief, and the Ten Hours' Act came into force May 1st, 1848. 1 In the Danubian Principalities the corvee was mixed up with rents in kind and other appurtenances of bondage, but it formed the most important tribute paid to the ruling class. 3 This spontaneous result is often artificially helped along, e.g., in the Engineering Trade of London, a customary trick is "the selecting of a man who possesses superior physical strength and quickness, as the princi- pal of several workmen, and paying him an additional rate, by the quarter or otherwise, with the understanding that he is to exert himself to the ut- most to induce the others, who are only paid the ordinary wages, to keep up to him ... The immense impetus it gives to the development of productive power, and to economy in the means of production, imposes on the work- man increased expenditure of labour in a given time, heightened tension of labour-power, and closer filling up of the pores of the working-day, or condensation of labour to a degree that is attain- able only within the limits of the shortened working-day. Now if we also reckon the remaining £1,000, which still con- tinues in the machinery, as transferred to the product, we ought also to reckon it as part of the value advanced, and thus make it appear on both sides of our calculation. In order to reward the manufacturers for having, in the most barefaced way, ignored all the Acts as to children's labour passed during the last twenty-two years, the pill was yet further gilded for them. The lessee [the capitalist exploiter] meanwhile has no pecuniary motive for resisting that division of the bargain; well knowing that if its latter conditions be exorbitant, the consequences fail, not on him, that his labourers on whom they fall have not educa- tion enough to know the value of their sanitary rights, that nei- ther obscenest lodging nor foulest drinking water will be appreci- able inducements towards a 'strike.'" 1 (d.) Effect of Crises on the best paid part of the Working-Class Before I turn to the regular agricultural labourers, 1 may be allowed to show, by one example, how industrial revulsions affect even the best-paid, the aristocracy, of the working-class. i. 454. 112. Several 'minders' have been fined for this offence, but without much general benefit. In spite, therefore, of the greatly increased number of looms in 1862, compared with 1856, the total number of the workpeople employed decreased, and that of the children exploited increased. 958,265 22,301 men \ 12,379 women / 13,803 Agriculture in England & Wales London tailors . In other words, the labour of the individual asserts itself as a part of the labour of society, only by means of the relations which the act of exchange establishes directly between the products, and indirect- ly, through them, between the producers. . The habit of giving such orders becomes more frequent with the extension of railways and tele- graphs. V. It either generates its own motive power, like the steam-engine, the caloric engine, the elec- tromagnetic machine, &c, or it receives its impulse from some al- ready existing natural force, like the water-wheel from a head of water, the wind-mill from wind, &c. — is less than the value created by its use during that time. Sic. of yarn is made up as fol- lows: 30s. On these an employe on the North Staffordshire line comments: "Everyone knows the consequences that may occur if the driver and fireman of a locomotive engine are not continually on the look-out. The manufacturer, therefore, asks for children who look as if they were already 13 years old. of yarn. "If," he says, with the affected naivete of a child of 8 years, "if it be advantageous, to develop the skill of the workman more and more, so that he is capable of producing, with the same or with a less quantity of labour, a constantly increasing quantity of commodities, it must also be advantageous, that he should avail himself of the help of such machinery as will assist him most effectively in the attainment of this result." (MacCulloch: "Princ. 3 Reports, &c, I. From the point of view then of capitalist production, the whole process appears as the spontaneous variation of the origi- nally constant value, which is transformed into labour-power. Whenever an individual capitalist cheapens shirts, for instance, by increasing the productiveness of labour, he by no means nec- essarily aims at reducing the value of labour-power and shorten- ing, pro tanto, the necessary labour-time. "(W. But it is only in the factory system that this inversion for the first time acquires technical and palpable reality. The consumption of labour-power is at one and the same time the production of commodities and of surplus-value. Report, 1866," p. a tap a av9p<ott0t<; /ptv, Kai rccmdi; ip^oo Suaaejietav ei<5evat." (Sophocles, Antigone.) MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OF COMMODITIES 133 his head from the bowels of the earth, 1 greets gold as its Holy Grail, as the glittering incarnation of the very principle of its own life. But the Pharisee of a capitalist, as may be seen from the same reports, denounces this brutality which he himself creates, perpetuates, and exploits, and which he moreover baptises "freedom of labour." "Infant labour has been called into aid... On the continent of Europe, after Colbert's example, the process was much simplified. j/yy/ 6 hours necessary labour - Variable Capital of 3 sh. 55, n. Sixth Rep.," Lond. (1863-1866), give cases where the worker not only receives no wages, but becomes, by means of his labour, and of the penal regulations, the debtor to boot, of his worthy master. 52.) 1 "There is required for carrying on the trade of the nation a determi- nate sum of specifick money, which varies, and is sometimes more, some- times less, as the circumstances we are in require.... The only thing, that here and there causes a change, besides new raw 1 1. The greater dearness of the means of subsistence is never forgot- ten there. First, the preliminary stage, consisting of the preparation of the components of the glass, mixing the sand and lime, &c, and melt- 1 "When (from the peculiar nature of the produce of each manufactory), the number of processes into which it is most advantageous to divide it is ascertained, as well as the number of individuals to be employed, then all other manufactories which do not employ a direct multiple of this number will produce the article at a greater cost.... First, he must create for the capitalist "capital," with which the latter may be able to exploit more labourers; then he must place, at his own expense, a locum tenens on the labour-market, whom the Government for- wards across the sea for the benefit of his old master, the capi- talist. The value created varies with the extent to which the intensity of labour deviates from its CHANGES OF MAGNITUDE 525 normal intensity in the society. For in the small towns the same man makes bedsteads, doors, ploughs, and tables: often, too, he builds houses into the bargain, and is quite content if he finds custom sufficient for his sustenance. As late as Charles I.'s reign, 1638, a royal commission was appointed to enforce the carrying out of the old laws, especially that referring to the 4 acres of land. F. It is not the normal maintenance of the labour-power which is to determine the limits of the working-day; it is the greatest possible daily expenditure of labour-power, no matter how diseased, compulsory, and painful it may be, which is to determine the limits of the labourers' period of repose. of yarn worth 3 shillings, a value equal to the whole value he creates in his 6 hours' necessary labour. The one workman therefore gives occupation directly to the other. c, p. 1 "Those who labour ... weekly. But the actual wage-variation can be evidenced in a very simple way, without entering into details that are here unneces- sary. In order to make gold a standard of price, a certain weight must be fixed upon as the unit. It is a common tradition in Lancash ire, that the beds never get cold." 1 1 John Fielden, 1. For example: if in consequence of the increased productiveness of labour, the value of labour-power fall from 4 shillings to 3, or the necessary labour-time from 8 hours to 6, the price of labour-power may possibly not fall below 3s. 443, 444.) Say, not in the least troubled as to the consequences of this statement, borrows it, almost word for word, from the Physiocrats. 4 'England and America/' Lond., 1833, Vol I., p 47. Inland Revenue." Lond. in all coun- tries, where industry is not restrained, the price of provisions must affect the price of labour. Since the producers' do not come into social contact with each other until they exchange their products, the specific social character of each producer's labour does not show itself except in the act of exchange. And thereby Paul, just as he stands in his Pauline personality, becomes to Peter the type of the genus homo. Secondly, the product is the property of the capitalist and not that of the labourer, its immediate producer. The other 200 are paid by the day, work equally long with the others, and get no more money for their over-time.... Strange, Senior Physician of the Worcester General Hospital, from whose work on "Health" (1864) this passage is taken, writes in a letter to Mr. White, one of the commissioners: "I have had opportunities formerly, when in Lancashire, of observing the effects of night-work upon children, and I have no hesitation in saying, contrary to what some employers were fond of asserting, those children who were subjected to it soon suffered in their health." (1. c, p. . Evidently, only by labouring 200 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION productively in a particular way; the spinner by spinning, the weaver by weaving, the smith by forging. But a glass furnace has several openings (in England from 4 to 6), each of which contains an earthenware melting-pot full of molten glass, and employs a similar five-mem- bered group of workers. The Equivalent form of value We have seen that commodity A (the linen), by expressing its value in the use-value of a commodity differing in kind (the coat), at the same time impresses upon the latter a specific form of value, namely that of the equivalent. In so far as such a manufacture, when first started, combines scattered handicrafts, it lessens the space by which the various phases of production are separated from each other. And whatever farm- work is done by his wife and children, is done at the same disad- vantage. Rep., p. c , p. This is precisely the reason why the product of his labour serves him solely as exchange-value. For instance, down to 1815, the emigration of mechanics employed in machine making was, in England, forbidden, under grievous pains and penalties. These different articles are, as regards the family, so many products of its labour, but as between themselves, they are not commodities. This power being of higher value, its consump- tion is labour of a higher class, labour that creates in equal times proportionally higher values than unskilled labour does. of yarn, in the example given in Sec. without remorse, make the omnibus drivers and conductors of London, &.C., work 16 hours a-day for the wages of a dog." Finally, spake the oracle, Thomas Carlyle, of whom I wrote, in 1850, "Zum Teufel ist der Genius, der Kultus ist geblieben." In a short parable, he reduces the one great event of contemporary history, the American Civ'.l War, to this level, that the Peter 256 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION done. Gov. 172.) This circumstance favourably distinguishes Malthus from the other Protestant parsons, who have shuffled off the com- mand enjoining celibacy of the priesthood and have taken, "Be fruitful and multiply," as their special Biblical mission in such a degree that they gen- erally contribute to the increase of population to a really unbecoming extent, whilst they preach at the same time to the labourers the "principle of popu- lation." It is characteristic that the economic fall of man, the Adam's ap- ple, the urgent appetite, "the checks which tend to blunt the shafts of Cupid," as Parson Townsend waggishly puts it, that this delicate question was and is monopolised by the Reverends of Protestant Theology, or rather of the Protestant Church. That period, roughly speaking, extends from the middle of the 16th to the last third of the 18th century. The workshop of the mediae- val master handicraftsman is simply enlarged. MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 465 most ample material bearing on it is to be found in the Public Health Reports IV. yields a surplus-value of 150s. Edinburgh, 1845, pp. Tucker, a notable economist of his time, excused himself for meddling with the things of Mammon. In other cases, these so-called school-rooms are like small store-rooms without fire-places. The same result might follow if, instead of the extensive amount of labour, its intensive amount increased. That form consequently makes it indispu- tably evident that in the world of commodities the character possessed by all labour of being human labour constitutes its specific social character. of this book it will be seen that this effect of machinery, which, as we have seen, is represented to be a com- pensation to the working-class, is on the contrary a most frightful scourge. Moreover, if the conversion take place at all, that is, if the commodity be not absolutely unsaleable, its metamorphosis does take place although the price realised may be abnormally above or below the value. Hence the sum of the means of subsistence necessary for the production of labour-power must include the means necessary for the labourer's substitutes, i.e., his children, in order that this race of peculiar commodity-owners may perpet- uate its appearance in the market. (See "Rep. "It must be remem- bered, too, that there has been more than two years of great suf- fering (in consequence of the terrible crisis of 1846-47) among the factory operatives, from many mills having worked short time, and many being altogether closed. The capitalist does not know that the normal price of labour also includes a definite quantity of unpaid labour, and that this very unpaid labour is the normal source of his gain. 1 As already stated, a steam-plough does as much work in one hour at a cost of threepence, as 66 men at a cost of 15 shillings. 1 The treatment of the aborigines was, naturally, most fright- ful in plantation-colonies destined for export trade only, such as the West Indies, and in rich and well-populated countries, such as Mexico and India, that were given over to plunder. Hence it was in this industry that, in the first half of the 18th century, the most experiments were 380 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION manifests itself. . The capital advanced would, in this case, not have expanded its value. I have often knelt down to feed him as he stood by the machine, for he could not leave it or stop." Smith, the managing partner of a Manchester factory: "We (he means his "hands" who work for "us") work on, with no stoppage for meals, so that the day's work of lOyhours is finished by 4.30 p. First, the main facts of the case. By an imperial Edict of 19th Feb., 1685, its use was for- bidden throughout all Germany. The capitalist class is constantly giving to the labouring class order-notes, in the form of money, on a portion of the commodities produced by the latter and appropriated by the former. c, p. I believe that in many cases they would act very partially indeed, and that it ought not to be in their hands to do so, where men's lives are at stake." (n. 146. The effect of all these possible different variations, on the relative value of a commodity, may be deduced from the results of I., II., and III. "The more society progresses, the more abstinence is de- manded," 1 namely, from those who ply the industry of appropri- ating the fruits of others' industry. c, pp. The character and tendency of the process M — G — M, is therefore not due to any qualitative difference between its extremes, both being money, but solely to their quantitative difference. . In both these cases, the spinner puts the same quantity of labour into a pound of cotton, and therefore adds as much value, as he did before the change in the value: he also produces a given weight of yarn in the same time as he did before. Merivale: "Lectures on Colonisation and Colonies," 1841. capital than their production costs." 4 In relation to circulation, producers and consumers meet only as buyers and sellers. Commodities as use-values now stand opposed to money as exchange-value. 3 All this happened without the slightest observation of 1 "A Letter to Sir T. When occupying the position of equivalent in the equation of value, the coat ranks qualitatively as the equal of the linen, as something of the same kind, because it is value. If each of these 24 men gives only one hour of sur- plus-labour in 12, the 24 men give together 24 hours of surplus-la- bour, while 24 hours is the total labour of the two men. At the best, its construction employs fewer men than its employment displaces. Bankers' and Merchants' Bills payable after date, £302,674 Bills payable after Cheques on London Bank- date, £533,596 ers 663,672 Cheques on Bankers, &c, Bank of England Notes, 22,743 payable on demand, 357,715 Gold, 9,427 Country Notes, 9,627 Silver and Copper, . He existed only on sufferance, as a dealer in the products of the handicrafts. — F. In a return of the 30th April, ... It tells us that in two different things — in 1 quarter of corn and x cwt. ... But, if the progress of accumulation lessens the relative magnitude of the variable part of capital, it by no means, in doing this, excludes the possibility of a rise in its absolute magni- tude. "No incon- venience," says Vanderlint, "can arise by an unrestrained trade, but very great advantage; since, if the cash of the nation be decreased by it, which prohibitions are designed to prevent, those nations that get the cash will certainly find everything advance in price, as the cash increases amongst them. Pol.," Paris Edn. The whole movement, therefore, seems to turn in a vicious circle, out of which we can only get by supposing a primitive accumulation (previous accu- mulation of Adam Smith) preceding capitalistic accumulation; an accumulation not the result of the capitalist mode of production but its starting-point. Relative surplus-population is therefore the pivot upon which the law of demand and supply of labour works. He is not a slave, but a soldier of peace, and deserves his place in married men's quarters to be provided by the landlord, who has claimed a power of enforced labour similar to that the country demands of the soldier. The value of the product of the working-day of 12 hours is twenty shillings. 8 In winter, from 7 a. If the mass of commodities remain constant, the quantity of circulating money varies with the fluctuations in the prices of those commodities. How little his book, which appeared ten years before the "Wealth of Nations," is known, even at the present time, may be judged from the fact that the admirers of Malthus do not even know that the first edition of the latter's work on population contains, except in the purely declamatory part, very little but extracts from Steuart, and in a less degree, from Wallace and Townsend. Given the value of these means of subsistence, the value of his labour-power is given; 1 and given the value of his labour-power, the duration of his necessary labour- time is given. The machine, which is the starting-point of the industrial revolution, supersedes the workman, who handles a single tool, by a mechanism operating with a number of similar tools, and set in motion by a single motive power, whatever the form of that power may be. Wool was formerly combed by hand, most frequently in the cottage of the comber. He pretends that in this way Turkey has been ruined, because "the owners and occupants of land have never been per- mitted by England to strengthen themselves by the formation of that natural alliance between the plough and the loom, the hammer and the harrow." ("The Slave Trade," p. Gen- erally speaking, the mode of producing relative surplus-value consists in raising the productive power of the workman, so as to enable him to produce more in a given time with the same ex- penditure of labour. Of the 450,000 working-class families, over 200,000 are on the pauper list. And so it is with the capitalist; when he has consumed the equivalent of his original capital, the value of his present capital represents nothing but the total amount of the surplus-value appro- priated by him without payment. c, p. Compulsory labour is just as properly measured by time, as commodity-producing labour; but every serf knows that what he expends in the service of his lord, is a definite quantity of his own personal labour-power. From fuller em- ployment, and greater exertions, the wages of labour may be considerably increased, while the price of labour may continue the same.'* West, 1. To this had to be added the so-called jobagie, service due to the lord for ex- traordinary occasions. 3 This industrial revolution which takes place spontaneously, is artificially helped on by the extension of the Factory Acts to all industries in which women, young persons and children are employed. The capitalist mode of appropriation, the result of the capi- talist mode of production, produces capitalist private property. m., 15 minutes. 4d., 3s. c, p. But it is different with commodities. There may therefore be undercurrent causes for such extraordinary exhibitions as strikes, not only wherever they arise, but par- ticularly at such times as the present, which without explanation, render them inexplicable to the public understanding." He alludes here to a strike of power-loom weavers at Darwen, June, 1863. The life-long speciality of handling one and the same tool, now becomes the life-long speciality of serving one and the same machine. 2,028,471 „ 12,184 „ Remainder of the to- tal yearly income 2,150,818,, 1,131 2,418,933,, 1,194 „ r 1,083,906 „ 910 ,. While one particular commodity is going through its two transmutations in succession, from a com- modity into money and from money into another commodity, the owner of the commodity changes in succession his part from that of seller to that of buyer. Wade, "History of the Middle and Working Classes," pp. Its second change of place always expresses the second metamorphosis of the com- modity, its re-conversion from money. One part he lays out in means of production. 25.) The author of this admirable work is the Th. Hodgskin 1 have already cited. Classical economy always loved to conceive social capital as a fixed magnitude of a fixed degree of efficiency. The exchange of commodities of itself implies no other relations of dependence than those which result from its own nature. Shortly afterwards, the town proletariat at Lyons sounded the tocsin of revolution, and the country proletariat in England began to set fire to farm-yards and corn-stacks. 2 ) we call "surplus-produce." Just as the rate of surplus- value is determined by its relation, not to the sum total of the capital, but to its variable part; in like manner, the relative quan- tity of surplus-produce is determined by the ratio that this prod- uce bears, not to the remaining part of the total product, but to that part of it in which is incorporated the necessary labour. The distinction between these tools and the body proper of the machine, exists from their very birth; for they continue for the most part to be produced by hand- icraft, or by manufacture, and are afterwards fitted into the body ised forms of those relations. A part of the surplus-value turned into additional capital must always be re-transformed into variable capital, or additional labour-fund. c, p. Let us assume that the line A B represents the length of the necessary working-time, say 6 hours. c, p. Mais dans l'ordre social, la richesse a acquis la propriete de se reproduire par le travail d'autrui, et sans que son proprietaire y concoure. The system on which they work, half manual labour, and half school, renders each employment a rest and a relief to the other; consequently, both are far more con- genial to the child, than would be the case were he kept constantly at one. to 6 p. With this money Rome purchased from them commodities, and purchased them too dear. Henceforth we shall con- sider the value of gold to be given, as, in fact, it'is momentarily whenever we estimate the price of a commodity. A still great- er contributing factor here is the relative decrease in the requirement of silver for articles of general use and for luxuries, that is its replacement by plated goods, aluminium, etc. 22, p. A one-sided observation of the results that followed upon the discovery of fresh supplies of gold and sil- ver, led some economists in the 17th, and particularly in the 18th century, to the false conclusion, that the prices of commodities had gone up in consequence of the increased quantity of gold and silver serving as means of circulation. Under ordinary circumstances the children attend school morning and afternoon for 30 days, for at least 5 hours each day, and upon the expiration of the 30 days, the statutory total of 150 hours having been attained, having, in their 1 Sir John Kincaid in "Rep. Three of our children attend school, for whom we pay Id. a week a head. 1,828 Deficit I'r. -{-3s. MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 467 The lace finishing is done either in what are called "mis- tresses' houses," or by women in their own houses, with or with- out the help of their children. For example, the price of one hour of the 12 hours' working-day is 3d., say the value-product of half a work- ing-hour, whilst the price of the over-time working-hour is 4d., or the value-product of -^ of a working-hour. In the course of time, therefore, some portion at least of the products of labour must be produced with a special view to exchange. 1 By putting itself in rela- tion with commodity B, as value in propria persona, as the matter of which human labour is made up, the commodity A converts 1 In a sort of way, it is with man as with commodities. It is value, rather, that converts every product into a social hiero- glyphic. Because the linen's price of £2, its de- nomination in money, has already equated the linen to gold in its character of money. We have then a third peculiarity of the equivalent form, namely, that the labour of private individuals takes the form of its oppo- site, labour directly social in its form. So far as the labour-process is purely individual, one and the same labourer unites in himself all the functions, that later on become separated. . The labour- power of each individual, by its very nature, operates in this case merely as a definite portion of the whole labour-power of the fam- ily, and therefore, the measure of the expenditure of individual labour-power by its duration, appears here by its very nature as a social character of their labour. "Although the same number of hands are employed in proportion to the horse- power as at former periods, there are fewer hands employed in proportion to the machinery." 2 "In the year 1850, the factories of the United Kingdom employed 134,217 nominal horse-power to give motion to 25,638,716 spindles and 301,445 looms. m. Before they become money, gold, silver, and copper already possess such standard measures in their standards of weight, so that, for example, a pound weight, while serving as the unit, is, on the one hand, divisible into ounces, and, on the other, may be combined to make up hundredweights. The narrow economic conditions under which that agriculture is carried on, will be swept away. On these occasions the notes have a single and speci t- ic function to perform, and so soon as they have performed it, they flow back into the various banks from which they issued. Thus it appears, that one factor of the labour-process, a means of production, continually enters as a whole into that process, while it enters into the process of the formation of value by fractions only. 29, 30 passim.) 140 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION of great commercial transactions. LENGTH OF THE WORKING-DAY VARIABLE The working-day may vary in two ways. REACTION OF THE AGRICULTURAL REVOLUTION 749 population, and completes the separation between agriculture and rural domestic industry, whose roots — spinning and weav- ing—it tears up. The result he arrives at, is precisely that proposition of Ri- cardo that he aimed at disproving. Such an equalisation can only be something foreign to their real nature, consequently only "a makeshift for practical purposes." Aristotle therefore, himself, tells us, what barred the way to his further analysis; it was the absence of any concept of value. This social need is met by early marriages, a necessary consequence of the condi- tions in which the labourers of modern industry live, and by the premium that the exploitation of children sets on their pro- duction. 3 The thoroughly conscientious investi- gations of the Children's Employment Commission prove that the effect of the regulation of the hours of work, in some indus- tries, was to spread the mass of labour previously employed more evenly over the whole year; 4 that this regulation was the first rational bridle on the murderous, meaningless caprices of fashion, 5 caprices that consort so badly with the system of modern industry; that the development of ocean navigation and of the means of communication generally, has swept away the technical basis on which season-work was really supported, 6 and that all other so-called unconquerable difficulties vanish before larger build- ings, additional machinery, increase in the number of work- 1 "Ch. Empl. "He makes the primitive hunter and the primitive fizher straightway, as owners of commodities, ex- change fish and game in the proportion in which labour-time is incorporated in these exchange-values. We have already learnt that machinery has possessed itself even of this branch of production on a scale that grows greater every day. Mr. Redgrave tells us of self-acting minders (oper- atives who manage a pair of self-acting mules) "earning at the end of a fortnight's full work 8s. 754 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION ment, and murder, floated back to the mother-country and were there turned into capital. It is the first authen- tic "History of Prices" of the time that we possess. This means close attention. On the whole, however, the early English economists sided with Bacon and Hobbes as their philosophers; while, at a later period, the philosopher xcu'e$oxV)v f Political Economy in England, France, and Italy, was Locke. 22. of yarn, in which the 4s., the re- mainder of the constant capital, is embodied, represents nothing but the value of the auxiliary materials and instruments of labour consumed in producing the 20 lbs, of yarn, 222 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION We have, therefore, arrived at this result: although eight- tenths of the product, or 16 lbs. If a self-acting mule is the implement 196 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION in general use for spinning, it would be absurd to supply the spinner with a distaff and spinning wheel. When the system attained to a certain degree of development, it had to root up this ready-made foun- dation, which in the meantime had been elaborated on the old lines, and to build up for itself a basis that should correspond to its methods of production. c. "Fifteen girls in stoves. Bastiat." THE LABOUR-PROCESS 193 man, and exclaims: "Have I myself not worked? The small amount thus earned is also often obliged to be spent in extra nourish- ment." ("Child. c, p. But in so doing we should be applying standards entirely foreign to commodity production. Pubblica," ed. All the capitalist cares for, is to reduce the labour- er's individual consumption as far as possible to what is strictly necessary, and he is far away from imitating those brutal South 1 Rossi would not declaim so emphatically against this, had he really penetrated the secret of "productive consumption." SIMPLE REPRODUCTION 573 Americans, who force their labourers to take the more substantial, rather than the less substantial, kind of food. 235, 237. 1 The labourer therefore constantly produces mate- rial, objective wealth, but in the form of capital, of an alien power that dominates and exploits him; and the capitalist as constantly produces labour-power, but in the form of a subjec- tive source of wealth, separated from the objects in and by which it can alone be realised; in short he produces the labourer, but as a wage-labourer. I mean Aris- totle. Though the capitalist have a hobby, and use a gold instead of a steel spindle, yet the only labour that counts for anything in the value of the yarn is that which would be required to produce a steel spindle, because no more is necessary under the given social conditions. (Isocrates, Bosiris, c. In England alone, which we take as our example, has it the classic form. In order to measure the mechanical force exert- ed to-day by an engine, an indicator has been invented which shows the pressure of the steam in the cylinder. Any alteration in this form, except in trivial matters, is 1 G. E. If we may trust the best statistical writers of that age, not less than 160,000 proprietors who, with their families, must have made up more than a seventh of the whole population, derived their subsistence from little freehold estates. this ... Let us make this clear once more by briefly reviewing the consecutive phases of motion whose culminating point is capitalist accumulation. 5.) The book-binding trade in the city of London employs very many young girls from 14 to 15 years old, and that under indentures which pre- scribe certain definite hours of labour. 1646). See "Hygiene phy- sique et morale de l'ouvrier dans les grandes villes en general et dans la ville de Lyon en particulier. 47.) Very curious is "the strong inclination ... 47 sq.) In his evidence before the Com- mittee of the House of Lords on the Bank Acts, a governor of the Bank of England says, with regard to the abrasion of gold coins during currency: "Every year a fresh class of sovereigns becomes too light. If the interval in time between the two 1 Self-evident as this may be, it is nevertheless for the most part unob- served by political economists, and especially by the "Free-trader Vulgaris." 114 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION complementary phases of the complete metamorphosis of a com- modity become too great, if the split between the sale and the purchase become too pronounced, the intimate connexion between them, their oneness, asserts itself by producing — a crisis. After holding out for some time, the self-elected captains of industry had to make up their minds to short time, with reduced wages in some places, and in others without. In the first form the movement is brought about by the intervention of money, in the second by that of a commodity. 1865." o. V. That identity further implies that the exchange, if it do take place, constitutes a period of rest, an interval, long or short, in the life of the com- modity. Gilmour, spinners at Manchester, state: "In our blowing-room department we consider our expense with new machinery is fully one-third less in wages and hands... A little outside the vil- lage, a house whose "tenants dunged against the house-side," the lower 9 inches of the door eaten away through sheer rottenness; the doorway, a single opening closed at night by a few bricks, ingeniously pushed up after shutting and covered with some mat- ting. The increase of mills in the country will, of course, extend these dreadful results, and it will be a great boon if they are brought under the legislature. Unless it takes the form of some com- modity, it does not become capital. During the whole of the 14th and the greater part of the 15th cen- tury, there was one acre of pasture to 2, 3, and even 4 of arable land. . . His soul is the soul of capital. II., p. 35, 36, 38. If I got only 12 hours' work out of my men, and my neighbour got 18 or 20, he must beat me in the selling price. I, p. Author of the anonymous work: "Th. Hodgskin." 2 Even as late as 1794, the small cloth-makers of Leeds sent a deputa- tion to Parliament, with a petition for a law to forbid any merchant Irom be- coming a manufacturer. Com., II. I. Appendix, p. These are candidates for the industrial reserve army, and are, in times of great prosperity, as 1860, e.g., speedily and in large numbers enrolled in the active 1 "Poverty seems favourable to generation." (A. Provisions and Necessaries. How long is it since economy dis- carded the physiocratic illusion, that rents grow out of the soil and not out of society? What does this equation tell us? As capitalist, he is only capital person- ified. 13.) "Demand [for labour] will rise ... * The law that regulates the division of labour in the community acts with the irresistible authority of a law of Nature, at the same time that each individual artificer, the smith, the carpenter, and so on, conducts in his workshop all the operations of his handicraft in the traditional way, but inde- pendently, and without recognising any authority over him. The fact that the currency of coins itself effects a separation between their nominal and their real weight, creating a distinc- tion between them as mere pieces of metal on the one hand, and as coins with a definite function on the other — this fact implies the latent possibility of replacing metallic coins by tokens of some other material, by symbols serving the same purposes as coins. On the contrary, each of the two contracting parties in every case, gives a less for a greater value. 4 6 7 — 7 1 6 1 3 5 7 1/-.2/-, 11 6 10 10 8 2 IV, 2 5 1/-.2/6, 5 1 4 2 1 1 London Economist, March 29lh, 1845, p. If this labourer were in posses- sion of his own means of production, and were satisfied to live as a labourer, he need not work beyond the time necessary for the re- production of his means of subsistence, say 8 hours a day. 143.) "Comme signe il est attire par les denrees." (1. The social relations of the individual producers, with regard both to their labour and to its products, are in this case perfectly simple and intelligible, and that with regard not only to production but also to distribution. The mechanism of the process of capi- talist production removes the very obstacles that it temporarily creates. The fact that the means of produc- tion, and the productiveness of labour, increase more rapidly than the productive population, expresses itself, therefore, capitalistically in the inverse form that the labouring population always increases more rapidly than the conditions under which capital can employ this increase for its own self-expan- sion. A water-wheel is necessary to exploit the force of water, and a steam-engine to exploit the elasticity of steam. Labour by the piece is generally cheaper in England." (James Anderson, "Observations on the Means of Exciting a Spirit of National Industry, &c, Edin. The real value of a commodity is, however, not its individual value, but its social value; that is to say, the real value is not measured by the labour-time that the article in each individual case costs the producer, but by the labour-time socially required for its production. 2 Certain guardians of these laws are appointed, Factory Inspectors, directly under the Home Secretary, whose reports are published half-yearly, by order of Parliament. A certain accumulation of capital, in the hands of individual producers of commodities, forms therefore the necessary prelim- inary of the specifically capitalistic mode of production. value of yarn=24s. By an Act, 25 Henry VIII., the same law was renewed. II., Lond., 1863), the number of people employed in coalmines in England and Wales, amounted to 246,613 of which 73,545 were under, and 173,067 were over 20 years. But under the Ten Hours' Act they were a "grievous hardship." 2 They informed the inspectors in the coolest manner that they should place themselves above the letter of the law, and re-introduce the old system on their own account. On the other hand, the money-value of this surplus-produce increased yet more rapidly than its mass, in consequence of the rise in the English market-price of meat, wool, &c, during the last 20, and especially during the last 10, years. 1009.) With much more naivete, Pinto, the Pindar of the Amsterdam Stock Exchange, remarks, "Le commerce est un jeu: (taken from Locke) et ce n'est pas avec des gueux qu'on peut gagner. Parry, 1. "You acknowledge," he says, "that the more expenses and the cost of la- bour can, in the manufacture of industrial products, be reduced without injury to production, the more advantageous is such reduc- tion, because it diminishes the price of the finished article. In a factory, suppose that 100 labourers working 8 hours a day yield 800 working-hours. If, now, this value of a day's labour-power is expressed as the value of a day's labour itself, we have the formula: Twelve hours' labour has a value of 3s. 1836, p. Moreover, the development of capitalist production makes it constantly necessary to keep in- creasing the amount of the capital laid out in a given industrial undertaking, and competition makes the immanent laws of capi- talist production to be felt by each individual capitalist, as external coercive laws. A fen farmer, e.g., gave evidence before the Commission of Inquiry: "I farm 320 acres, all arable land. m., of which — an hour is subtracted for breakfast. m., or as the usual phrase is, "all hours," and that in localities where "the stench is enough to knock you down, you go to the door, perhaps, and open it, but 1 "Child. 8 The number of shepherds increased from 12,517 to 25,559. In the face of the habitual mode of life of the old feudal nobility, which, as Hegel rightly says, "consists in consuming what is in hand," and more especially displays itself in the luxury of personal retain- ers, it was extremely important for bourgeois economy to promul- gate the doctrine that accumulation of capital is the first duty of every citizen, and to preach without ceasing, that a man cannot accumulate, if he eats up all his revenue, instead of spending a good part of it in the acquisition of additional productive labourers, who bring in more than they cost. 80, 203, 204). In order to effect a fall in the value of labour-power, the increase in the productiveness of labour must seize upon those branches of industry, whose products determine the value of labour-power, and consequently either belong to the class of customary means of subsistence, or are capable of supplying the place of those means. Thiers, e.g., had the assurance to repeat it with all the solemnity of a states- man, to the French people, once so spirituel. THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 679 the two other classes," x whilst "the amount of labour required from an ordinary convict under penal servitude is about one half of what would be done by an ordinary day-labourer." 2 A few char- acteristic depositions of witnesses: John Smith, governor of the Edinburgh prison, deposes: No. 5056. 20 yards of linen =20 yards of linen is no ex- pression of value. Now let some one capitalist contrive to double the productiveness of labour, and to produce in the work- 1 "Let us suppose ... He speaks first of "the one labour," then of "the other labour," and finally of "labour " without further qualification, as the substance of the value of everything. 8,227,807 Acres. Redgrave in "Reports of Insp. Upon asking her to spell her name, she straightway made a mis- take, by beginning with the letter G, but correcting herself immediately, she said her name began with a K. 184-185.) 2 'The right of the poor to share in the tithe, is established by theten- our of ancient statutes." (Tuckett, 1. 77, 78. That sooner or later, therefore, the capital and the workmen must come together again, and that, then, the compensation is complete. But a reaction set in. The concluding metamorphosis of a commodity thus con- stitutes an aggregation of first metamorphoses of various other commodities. An uncommonly knowing dodge this. The minimum limit is, however, not determinable; of course, if we make the extension line B G or the surplus-labour =0, we have a minimum limit, i.e., the part of the day which the labourer must necessarily work for his own maintenance. If the labourer does not possess the average capacity, if he cannot in consequence supply a certain minimum of work per day, he is dismissed. The differ- ence of these two sums, or the surplus-value, would still be £90. l 1 The subject of repairs of the implements of labour does not concern us here. 2 Gold, as we saw, became ideal money, or a measure of values, in consequence of all commodities measuring their values by it, and thus contrasting it ideally with their natural shape as useful objects, and making it the shape of their value. 78.) To economise what? But in those finishing sties there are but 67 to 100 cubic feet to each person. c, p. And yet the work of such a Hindu weaver is very complicated, compared with that of a manufactur- ing labourer. In the year 1860, when a special census of all the factories in the United Kingdom was taken by order of Parliament, the factories in those parts of Lancashire, Cheshire, and Yorkshire, included in the district of Mr. Baker, the factory inspector, numbered 652; 570 of these con- tained 85,622 power-looms, 6,819,146 spindles (exclusive of dou- bling spindles), employed 27,439 horse-power (steam), and 1,390 (water), and 94,119 persons. . so faithfully exhibited in the Reports of our Assistant Commissioners, and which cannot be regarded without the deepest pain, and a profound sense of national degradation. 2 Steuart says: "If you compare the rent of these lauds" (he erroneously includes in this economic category the tribute of the taskmen to the clan- chief) "with the extent, it appears very small. 1 cellar 8 persons Acre Street . The new poor law furthers the migration of agricul- tural labourers into the factory districts. With the increasing mass of wealth which functions as capital, accumulation increases the concentra- tion of that wealth in the hands of individual capitalists, and thereby widens the basis of production on a large scale and of the specific methods of capitalist production. 147.) Since certain family functions, such as nursing and suckling children, cannot be entirely suppressed, the mothers confiscated by capital, must try substitutes of some sort. 1 1 John Bellers, a very phenomenon in the history of Political Economy, saw most clearly at the end of the 17th century, the necessity for abolishing the present system of education and division of labour, which beget hypertrophy and atrophy at the two opposite extremities of society. So long as, in a given branch of industry, the factory system extends itself at the expense of the old handicrafts or of manu- facture, the result is as sure as is the result of an encounter be- tween an army furnished with breach-loaders, and one armed with bows and arrows. There is also no doubt that such revolutionary ferments, the final result of which is the abolition of the old division of labour, are diametrically opposed to the capitalistic form of production, and to the economic status of the labourer corresponding to that form. they were in many cases starved to the bone while flogged to their work and . commodities ... Hegel, "Philosophie des Rechts." Berlin, 1840. Neck- er, Paris and Lausanne, 1789, t. Along with the useful qualities of the products them- selves, we put out of sight both the useful character of the various kinds of labour embodied in them, and the concrete forms of that labour; there is nothing left but what is common to them all; all are reduced to one and the same sort of labour, human labour in the abstract. 412 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION items, for one hour. It is indeed notorious that the sphere of labour is not the only one in which primogeniture works miracles, 586 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION Nor does it matter if simple reproduction is replaced by repro- duction on an extended scale, by accumulation. 166. They are forms of thought expressing with social validity the conditions and relations of a definite, historically determined mode of production, viz., the production of commodities. The scattered means of production that serve the producers themselves as means of employment and of subsistence, without expanding their own value by the incorporation of the labour of others, are no more capital than a product consumed by its own producer is a commodity. When once the most fitting proportion has been experimental- ly established for the numbers of the detail labourers in the various groups when producing on a given scale, that scale can be extended only by employing a multiple of each particular group. But beyond this point the wear and tear in- creases in geometrical progression, and every condition suitable for the normal reproduction and functioning of labour-power is suppressed. No matter how this value varies, the proportions between the values of different quantities of the metal remain constant. It is, besides their real ignorance, their apologetic dread of a scientific analysis of value and surplus-value, and of obtaining a result, possibly not altogether palatable to the powers that be. II. of 1840 stocking making was still done by manual labour. In the latter case, the so- cial division of labour arises from the exchange between spheres of production, that are originally distinct and independent of one another. The predominance, in a society, of this form of exploitation excludes the capitalist mode of production; to which mode, however, this form may serve as a transition, as it did towards the close of the middle ages. and 10 p. Horse-power is requisite wherever crooked fences and other obstruc- tions prevent' uniform action. If the tongue is thus used in the North as the organ of appropriation, no wonder that, in the South, the stomach serves as the organ of accumulated property, and that a Kaffir estimates the wealth of a man by the size of his belly. By our assumption, the coat is worth twice as much as the linen. 2 It was partly the want of streams with a good fall on them, and partly their battles with superabundance of water in other respects, that compelled the Dutch to resort to wind as a motive power. Hence in England an embittered struggle of the corporate towns against these new industrial nurseries. Political Economy values this fact so highly, that it occasionally identifies the acceleration of accumulation due to increased pro- ductiveness of labour, with its acceleration due to increased exploitation of the labourer. It is the process itself that incessantly hurls back the labourer on to the market as a vendor of his labour-power, and that incessantly converts his own product into a means by which another man can purchase him. The opposition against the establishment of new manufactures, pro- ceeds from the guilds and privileged towns, not from the work- people. G68 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION crises with which the industrial cycle periodically ends. 3 Tbe author of "Observations" and S. * Hence the increase of the hands in these latter trades was merely a symptom of a diminution in the total number employed. 2 1. Farmers' Profits Schedule D. Each piece of money is a mere coin, or means of circulation, only so long as it actually circulates. As a result of this movement, day-labour alone was successfully established in Wexford, Kilkenny, Clonmel, Waterford, &c. Labour-time would, in that case, play a double part. The operatives stream in thou- sands into the towns of Lancashire and Yorkshire, are driven back by the military, and their leaders brought to trial at Lancaster; 1843 great misery; 1844 revival; 1845 great prosperity; 1846 con- tinued improvement at first, then reaction. Here, production and reproduction on a progressively increasing scale, go on their way without any intervention from that queer saint, that knight of the woeful coun- tenance, the capitalist "abstainer." 1 "The particular classes of income which yield the most abundantly to the progress of national capital, change at different stages of their prog- ress, and are, therefore, entirely different in nations occupying different positions in that progress... The expropriation of the immediate producers was accomplished with merciless Vandalism, and under the stimulus of passions the most in- famous, the most sordid, the pettiest, the most meanly odi ous. In Part VII. Deer-forests 1 and the people cannot co-exist. In proportion to the size of its population, every village has to furnish annually a definite contingent to the jobagie. And this is the specific difference between centralisation and con- centration, the latter being only another name for reproduction on an extended scale. Paris, 1844.) 76 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION to the establishment of their characters as values. As to the extent of the stoppage, it appears from authentic esti- mates, that in October 1862, 60.3% of the spindles, and 58% of the looms were standing. Knight: VVhat is the next sort that ye say would win by it? 1 ,669,267 yds. While the rich have been growing richer, the poor have been growing less poor. So long as the laws of exchange are observed in every single act of exchange the mode of appropriation can be completely revolutionised with- out in any way affecting the property rights which correspond to commodity production. The next termination of the cycle was due in 1866. Production of surplus-value is the absolute law of this mode of production. Under their money-form all com- modities look alike. If busy, they work till 9 or 12 at night for successive nights." (Reports, &c, for 31st October, 1862, p. On April 16th, 1863, 20 years later, in the speech in which he introduced his Budget: "From 1842 to 1852 the taxable income of the country increased by 6 per cent. "It is the fact . Hence, the productive power resulting from a combination of labours appears to be the productive power of capital. We have seen that the development of the capitalist mode of production and of the productive power of labour — at once the cause and effect of accumulation — enables the capitalist, with the same outlay of variable capital, to set in action more labour by greater exploitation (extensive or intensive) of each individ- ual labour-power. V. 2 In cases where the additional time is gained by a multiplication of small thefts in the course of the day, there are insuperable difficulties to the inspectors making out a case." 3 These "small thefts" of capital from the labourer's meal and recreation time, the factory inspectors also designate as "petty pilferings of minutes," 4 "snatching a few minutes," 5 or, as the labourers technically called them, "nibbling and cribbling at meal-times." 6 1 Reports, &c, October 31st, 1860, p. What economists there- fore call value of labour, is in fact the value of labour-power, as it exists in the personality of the labourer, which is as different from its function, labour, as a machine is from the work it performs. 5 I. 2 Of all the animals kept by the farmer, the labourer, the instru- mentum vocale, was, thenceforth, the most oppressed, the worst nourished, the most brutally treated. . Mr. A. Free Americans, who cultivate the soil, follow many other occupations. 40.) 1 Note to the 2nd Ed. Since 1866, when I wrote the above passages, a re-action has again set in. The character of creditor, or of debtor, results here from the simple circulation. c, pp. In the manufacture of carriages, however, all these different artificers are assembled in one building where they work into one another's hands. Formerly, I employed four boys to every mechanic. Defects of the Total or Expanded form of value In the first place, the relative expression of value is incomplete because the series representing it is interminable. A system of machinery, whether it reposes on the mere co- operation of similar machines, as in weaving, or on a combination of different machines, as in spinning, constitutes in itself a huge automaton, whenever it is driven by a self-acting prime mover. The degradation, in its social bearing on the girls, is deplorable in the extreme. 6d. . Employ- ment by him is, therefore, much more lucrative and more cer- tain for the labouring families, than employment by the individ- ual farmer, who only employs children occasionally. It is in the lat- ter that building speculators can build cottages and lodging-houses. 2 The older writers, like Petty and the anonymous Author of "Advan- tages of the East. One child sickened and died. The manufacturers had no need any longer to restrain themselves. 3 The question put by one of the Inquiry Commissioners, How the young persons are kept steadily to their work, is very correctly answered by Mr. Wm. Marshall, the general manager of a glass manufactory: "They cannot well neglect their work; when they once begin, they must go on; they are just the same as parts of a machine." ("Children's Empl. 137, n. The corpses of machines, tools, workshops, &c, are always sepa- rate and distinct from the product they helped to turn out. Rep.," Evidence, p. That he was a skilled factory hand, may be understood when I say that he was employed on goods for the Man- chester market. On the other hand, his school has openly proclaimed the productiveness of labour to be the originating cause of profit (read: surplus-value). 1 Sir James Steuart also understands machinery quite in this sense. Value therefore now becomes value in process, money in process, and, as such, capital. That this credit is no mere fiction, is shown not only by the occasional loss of wages on the bankruptcy of the capitalist, 2 but also by a series of more enduring conse- quences. The minimum of variable capital is the cost price of a single labour-power, employed the whole year through, day in, day out, for the production of surplus-value. 174) it was shown that in reality the labourer "ad- vances" to the capitalist and not the capitalist to the labourer.—/ 1 . 709, 716, and Schorlemmer, "The Rise and Development of Organic Chemistry." London, 1879, p. This category numbered, in 1851, 216,851 persons; in 1861, only 176,151. Thus from this cause only, 906 accidents have occurred during the six months. The constant repetition of exchange makes it a normal social act. c, pp 35, 36.) 761 CHAPTER XXXir HISTORICAL TENDENCY OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION WhaT does the primitive accumulation of capital, i.e. , its histori- cal genesis, resolve itself into? Such cruel talk about "idleness and vice" ought to be branded as the purest cant, and the most shameless hypocrisy.... 3 3 Cft co O ID •o <! SA O 3 3 O X CQ < X3 O 3 ^S No. 1. Ferguson. of cotton into 1-|- lbs. A flying column of pestilence, it carries into the places in whose neighbourhood it pitches its camp, small-pox, typhus, cholera, scarlet fever, &c. G. The circuit G— M— G comes completely to an end, so soon as the money brought in by the sale of one commodity is abstract- ed again by the purchase of another. per lb. C'est par le moyen de ces services productifs, que nous acquerons tous les produits qui sont au monde. This quantity is expressed by the value of the commodity, and since the value is reckoned in money of account, this quantity is also expressed by the price, which we will suppose to be £10. * During the manufacturing period proper, i.e., the period dur- ing which manufacture is the predominant form taken by capital- ist production, many obstacles are opposed to the full develop- ment of the peculiar tendencies of manufacture. And as equivalent of the linen in the value equation, it exists under this aspect alone, counts therefore as embodied value, as a body that is value. It was now a question of production of surplus-labour itself. But we must bear in. This antagonistic movement has its origin in the two-fold character of labour. of Fact, for 1844 and the quarter ending 30th April, 1845, pp. If the general extension of factory legislation to all trades for the purpose of protecting the working-class both in mind and body has become inevitable, on the other hand, as we have al- ready pointed out, that extension hastens on the general conver- sion of numerous isolated small industries into a few combined industries carried on upon a large scale; it therefore accelerates the concentration of capital and the exclusive predominance of the factory system. indeed the English seem to have set, in good earnest, about en- couraging manufactures and employing the poor. v. to represent net wealth as beneficial to the labouring class ... But every single component of this product must be brought into the market as a commodity, and there the difficulty begins. In Western Europe, the home of Political Economy, the process of primitive accumulation is more or less accomplished. The collective labourer, with one set of his many hands armed with one kind of tools, draws the wire, with another set, armed with different tools, he at the same time, straightens it, with another, he cuts it, with another, points it, and so on. We now proceed to consider the substitution of a more intensified labour for labour of more extensive duration, and the degree of the former. It steals the time required for the consumption of fresh air and sunlight. Piece-workers are in fact their own masters, even whilst working upon the capital of the employer." (John Watts: "Trade Societies and Strikes, Machinery and Co-operative Societies." Manchester, 1865, pp. For all that, the French revolutionary method has its special advan- tages. Genovesi, Lezioni di Economia Civile (1765), Custodi's edit, of Italian Economists. when he was 7 years old I used to carry him on my back to and fro through the snow, and he used to have 16 hours a day ... These characters of seller and buyer are therefore not permanent, but attach themselves in turns to the various persons engaged in the circulation of commodities. Just as the social productive power of labour that is developed by co-operation, appears to be the productive power of capital, so co-operation itself, contrasted with the process of production carried on by isolated independent labourers, or even by small em- 1 R. It is the first change experienced by the actual labour- process, when subjected to capital. Capital cares nothing for the length of life of labour-power. "the rich grow rapidly richer, whilst there is no perceptible advance in the comfort enjoyed by 1 Gladstone in the House of Commons, April 16th, 1863. You would persuade us, by the example of David Hume, Esq., that atheism is the only cordial for low spirits, and the proper antidote against the fear of death... Acts is to force on the further introduction of machinery" (1. . 2d.; the total yearly expenditure of a family of 5 per- sons, £54 18s. . Concerning the half-dozen petitions in which workpeople were made to complain of "their oppression by the Act," the petitioners themselves declared under oral examina- tion, that their signatures had been extorted from them. If new mines are opened in the neighbourhood, or old ones are again set working, the pressure increases. 2 3 5 " 5. 2 "The wages of labour depend upon the price of labour and the quan- tity of labour performed.... The social action therefore of all other commodities, sets apart the particular commodity in which they all represent their values. Hist.," lib. The Elementary form of value considered as a whole The elementary form of value of a commodity is contained in the equation, expressing its value-relation to another com- modity of a different kind, or in its exchange-relation to the same. m. The equality of these two sums is therefore self-evident. THE WORKING-DAY 287 that it will not be lawful to work for 10 hours continuously, from 9 a. The one he does on his own field, the other on the seignorial estate. "And it is now expressly admitted that the practice exists in England from the desire of mill-owners to have their machinery at work for more than 10 hours a-day, to keep the children at work with male adults after all the young persons and women have left, and until 8.30 p. Much more aptly, the anonymous predecessor of Adam Smith, quoted above in Note 1, p. Every advance in Chemistry not only multiplies the number of useful materials and the useful applications of those already known, thus extending with the growth of capital its sphere of investment. By the Rev. CRISES IN THE COTTON TRADE All political economists of any standing admit that the in- troduction of new machinery has a baneful effect on the workmen in the old handicrafts and manufactures with which this ma- chinery at first competes. After the restoration of the Stuarts, the landed proprietors carried, by legal means, an act of usurpation, effected everywhere on the Continent without any legal formality. THE GENERAL LAW OP CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 705 C shows that the change of arable to pasture land must work yet more acutely in Ireland than in England. After making allowance, both in the case of the machine and of the tool, for their average daily cost, that is for the value they transmit to the product by their average daily wear and tear, and for their consumption of auxiliary substances, such as oil, coal, and so on, they each do their work gratuitously, just like the forces fur- nished by Nature without the help of man.The greater the produc- tive power of the machinery compared with that of the tool, the greater is the extent of its gratuitous service compared with that of the tool. Wages, as we have seen, by their very nature, always imply the performance of a certain quantity of unpaid labour on the part of the labourer. Aft- er the repeal of the Corn Laws, from 1846 to 1863, there are 8 years of moderate activity and prosperity against 9 years of depression and stagnation. c, p. Rogier, the minister, informed me that children's labour is limited neither by a general law nor by any local regulations; that the Government, during the last three years, intended in every session to propose a bill on the subject, but always found an insuperable obstacle in the jealous opposition to any legislation in con- tradiction with the principle of perfect freedom of labour." 278 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION SECTION 6.— THE STRUGGLE FOR THE NORMAL WORKING-DAY. The buyer takes it from the hands of the seller and passes it into the hands of another buyer. 124 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION metals in a country; 1 this opinion was based by those who first held it, on the absurd hypothesis that commodities are without a price, and money without a value, when they first enter into circu- lation, and that, once in the circulation, an aliquot part of the medley of commodities is exchanged for an aliquot part of the heap of precious metals. So long as the Republic lasted, the mass of the English people of all grades rose from the degradation into which they had sunk under the Tudors. . But the capitalist now produces 24 articles, which he sells at tenpence a-piece, making twenty shillings in all. • 1. The legal limita- tion of the working-day puts an end to such mischief, although not, of course, to the diminution of employment caused by the competition of machinery, by changes in the quality of the labour- ers employed, and by crises partial or general. THE WORKING-DAY 247 most active business months are from the beginning of October to the end of April. If to classical economy, the proletarian is but a machine for the production of surplus-value; on the other hand, the capitalist is in its eyes only a machine for the conversion of this surplus-value into additional capital. 1 If the owner of labour- power works to-day, to-morrow he must again be able to repeat the same process in the same conditions as regards health and strength. But in the expression of value there is a complete turn of the tables. they would not 1 Reports of the Inspector of Factories for the half year, October, 1856, p. Vol. We saw in Part IV., when analysing the production of relative surplus-value: within the capitalist system all methods for raising the social productiveness of labour are brought about at the cost of the individual labourer; all means for the develop- ment of production transform themselves into means of domi- nation over, and exploitation of, the producers; they mutilate the labourer into a fragment of a man, degrade him to the level of an appendage of a machine, destroy every remnant of charm in his work and turn it into a hated toil; they estrange from him the intellectual potentialities of the labour-process in the same proportion as science is incorporated in it as an independent pow- er; they distort the conditions under which he works, subject him during the labour-process to a despotism the more hateful for its meanness; they transform his life-time into working-time, and drag his wife and child beneath the wheels of the Juggernaut of capital. m. (n. 4 "All those who are paid by piece-work... That which on your side appears a spontaneous expansion of capital, is on mine extra expenditure of labour-power. The tender-hearted English Parliament long affected to shrink from taking this step. "Illi unum consilium habent et virtutem et potestatem suam bestise tradunt. Finally, just as Manufacture arises in part from the combina- tion of various handicrafts, so, too, it develops into a combina- tion of various manufactures. To know what is useful for a dog, one must study dog-nature. The value created by a working-day of 12 hours is a constant quantity, say, six shillings. In sixteen of the registration districts into which England 1 "Children's Employment Commission, Fifth Report," London, 1866, p. of linen; this tautology expresses neither value, nor magnitude of value. This palpable law is of importance for the clearing up of many phenomena, arising from a tendency (to be worked out later on) of capital to reduce as much as possible the number of labour- ers employed by it, or its variable constituent transformed into labour-power, in contradiction to its other tendency to produce 1 This elementary law appears to be unknown to the vulgar economists, who, upside-down Archimedes, in the determination of the market-price of labour by supply and demand, imagine they have found the fulcrum by means of which, not to move the world, but to stop its motion. 2 1 "If my neighbour by doing much with little labour, can sell cheap, I must contrive to sell as cheap as he. 1821, p. The workmen had no claim whatever to share in the profits made by the investment of their employer's capital in mechani- cal improvements. in great part dependent for their work- ing on such cottage-owners as the one from whom his (the labour- er's) hovel is rented. One of their first consequences was that in practice the working-day of the adult males in factories became subject to the same limitations, since in most processes of production the co-opera- tion of the children, young persons, and women is indispen- sable. a "Reports of Insp. The circulation of capital has therefore no lim- its. . of Insp. 4 As will be seen more in detail in the fourth book of this work, Adam Smith has not established a single new proposition relating to division of labour. Either the entire machine is only a more or less altered mechanical edition of the old handicraft tool, as, for instance, the power-loom, 1 or the working parts fitted in the frame of the machine are old acquaintances, as spindles are in a mule, needles in a stocking-loom, saws in a sawing-machine, and knives in a chopping machine. He acts in earnest up to the Gospel of abstention. Now deer are supplanting sheep; and these are once more dispossessing the small tenants, who will necessarily be driven down upon still coarser land and to more grinding penury. The economic structure of capitalistic society has grown out of the economic structure of feudal society. 6 8 7 1/-.1/6, 10 1 6 8 6 1 0>/ 4 6 8 7 V-,1/6, 7 1 3 1 /, 5 8V, 8V, 8 10 7 — 7 1 3V, 5 8\/ 2 7 4 6 7 — 7 1 6«/ 2 5 5 l / 2 11 3 5 7 — 7 1 6V 2 5 5V. We must confess that we do not think it 'worth while,' or even possible, to keep the human ma- chinery in order — that is to shut it up and keep it oiled till it is wanted. Sanderson, "this would suit as 1 1. A childish silly employ" (a warning this, by presentiment, against the Basedows and their modern MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 489 So long as Factory legislation is confined to regulating the labour in factories, manufactories, &c, it is regarded as a mere interference with the exploiting rights of capital. c, p. m. Take, e.g., 1 Thus, e.g., in "Dritter Brief an v. 11. Lastly, the quickness with which machine work is learnt by young people, does away with the necessity of bringing up for exclusive employment by machinery, a special class of oper- atives. According to Eschwege, the total produce of the Brazilian diamond mines for the eighty years, ending in 1823, had not realised the price of one-and-a-half years' average produce of the sugar and coffee plantations of the same country, although the diamonds cost much more labour, and therefore represented more value. Hence, rapid renewal of the generations of labourers (this law does not hold for the other classes of the population). Engels, 1. It provides nothing more than that the children shall on certain days of the week, and for a certain number of hours (three) in each day, be inclosed within the four walls of a place called a school, and that the employer of the child shall receive weekly a certificate to that effect signed by a person designated by the subscriber as a schoolmaster or schoolmistress." 1 Previous to the passing of the amended Factory Act, 1844, it happened, not unfrequently, that the certificates of attendance at school were signed by the schoolmaster or schoolmistress with a cross, as they themselves were unable to write. The exchange becomes an accomplished fact by two metamorphoses of opposite yet supplementary character — the conversion of the commodity into money, and the re-conversion of the money into a commodity. c, p ; 50. The unpaid part of the la- bour-price need not be reckoned in the price of the commodity. No. 71,961 Acres. All labour of a higher or more complicated character than average labour is expenditure of labour-power of a more costly kind, labour- power whose production has cost more lime and labour, and which therefore has a higher value, than unskilled or simple labour-power. Let us take two commodities, e.g., corn and iron. The diversity of these measures has its origin partly in the di- verse nature of the objects to be measured, partly in convention. What changes, is the value of this quantity. For instance, if a dozen masons place themselves in a row, so as to pass stones from the foot of a ladder to its summit, each of them does the same thing; nevertheless, their separate acts form connected parts of one total operation; they are particular phases, which must be gone through by each stone; and the stones are thus carried up quicker by the 24 hands of the row of men than they could be if each man went separately up and down the ladder with his burden. . There the municipal philistine was just busied with urban improvements. Now at home, in one room, starv- ing, or near to it, then engaged 15, 16, aye, even 18 hours out of the 24, in an air that is scarcely tolerable, and on food which, even if it be good, cannot be digested in the absence of pure air. And for a society based upon the production of commodities, in which the producers in general enter into social relations with one another by treating their products as commodities and values, whereby they reduce their individual private labour to the stand- ard of homogeneous human labour — for such a society, Chris- tianity with its cultus of abstract man, more especially in its bourgeois developments, Protestantism, Deism, &c, is the most fitting form of religion. Pet- ty, "Political Anatomy of Ireland," p. And I on each occasion meet them as a mere owner of either money or commodities, as a buyer or a seller, and, what is more, in both sets of transactions, I am opposed to A only as a buyer and to B only as a seller, to the one only as money, to the other only as commodities, and to neither of them as capital or a capitalist, or as representative of anything that is more than money or commodities, or that can produce any effect beyond what money and commodities can. The first metamorphosis of one commodity, its transformation from a com- modity into money, is therefore also invariably the second meta- morphosis of some other commodity, the retransformation of the latter from money into a commodity. If there is none, but all happens to be in coin, what then? Hence, the sum of the prices to be realised, and consequently the quantity of the circulating medium depending on that sum, will vary with the numerous variations of these three factors in combination. (2.) The individual difference in the wages of different labourers who do the same kind of work. 137.) Mr. Kinnaird: "Should you say that the col- liers generally improve their education; have you any instances of men who have, since they began to work, greatly improved their education, or do they not rather go back, and lose any ad- vantage that they may have gained?" "They generally become worse: they do not improve; they acquire bad habits; they get on to drinking and gambling and such like, and they go com- pletely to wreck." (n. If a definite quantity of la- bour, say thirty days, is requisite to build a house, the total 188 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION amount of labour incorporated in it is not altered by the fact that the work of the last day is done twenty-nine days later than that of the first. To set in motion the part of social wealth which is to function as constant capital, or, to express it in a material form, as means of production, a definite mass of living labour is required. 15.) 2 "Reports of Inspectors of Fact.," 30th April, 1860, pp. 2 "Public Health. At the end of every labour-process, we get a result that already existed in the imagination of the la- bourer at its commencement. Since the value of the constituent elements of the product is equal to the value of the advanced capital, it is mere tautology to say, that the excess of the value of the product over the value of its constituent elements, is equal to the expansion of the capital ad- vanced or to the surplus-value produced. A third law results from the determination, of the mass of the surplus-value produced, by the two factors: rate of surplus-value and amount of variable capital advanced. 2 In England and Wales, in 1861, there were employed in making ma- chinery, 60,807 persons, including the masters and their clerks, &c, also all agents and business people connected with this industry, but excluding the makers of small machines, such as sewing-machines, &.C., as also the makers of the operative parts of machines, such as spindles. ,,«,,_, 2 By I. 2 See the official accounts in the Blue book: "Miscellaneous Statistics of the United Kingdom," Part vi"., London, 1866, pp. It forms the general groundwork of the capitalist system, and the starting-point for the production of relative surplus-value. This report deals especially with the agricultural labourers. The number of power-looms decreased by 20,663; but since their product increased in the same period, an improved loom must have yielded more than an old one. Ricardo never concerns himself about the origin of surplus- value. Hence the enigmat- ical character of the equivalent form which escapes the notice of the bourgeois political economist, until this form, completely developed, confronts him in the shape of money. 2 Capital celebrated its orgies. And yet then also they be caste in prison as vagaboundes, because they go aboute and vvorke not: whom no man wyl set a worke though thei neuer so willyngly profre themselues therto." Of these poor fugitives of whom Thomas More says that they were forced to thieve, "7,200 great and petty thieves were put to death," in the reign of Henry VIII. 2 I. 104, § 67.) THE BUYING AND SELLING OF LABOUR-POWER 169 which his labour is incorporated, must be obliged to offer for sale as a commodity that very labour-power, which exists only in his living self. SECTION 3.— PROGRESSIVE PRODUCTION OF A RELATIVE SURPLUS-POPULATION OR INDUSTRIAL RESERVE ARMY The accumulation of capital, though originally appearing as its quantitative extension only, is effected, as we have seen, under a progressive qualitative change in its composition, THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 629 under a constant increase of its constant, at the expense of its variable constituent. Such in the middle ages were the virements at Lyons. 4) Workshops in which no children or young workers are employed, but only persons of both sexes above the age of 18; this category enjoy still easier conditions. The agricultural revo- lution which commenced in the last third of the 15th century, and continued during almost the whole of the 16th (excepting, however, its last decade), enriched him just as speedily as it impoverished the mass of the agricultural people. And with the rise of national debt-making, want of faith in the national debt takes the place of the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, which may not be forgiven. On the other hand, every one knows that the dearness of dwellings is in inverse ratio to their excellence, and that the mines 1 1. 2 "Labour creates capital before capital employs labour." E. co C H O EH < P ft O ft bo . He has explained the apparent relation between objects, such as diamonds and pearls, in which relation they appear as exchange-val- ues, and disclosed the true relation hidden behind the appearances, namely, their relation to each other as mere expressions of human labour. They were ordinary men, not Cyclops. 'Is the trade worth retaining?' asks Mr. Potter. "The Advantages of the East India Trade, 1720.'* John Bellers, 1. Modern Manufacture I now proceed, by a few examples, to illustrate the principles laid down above. of Fact, for 31st Oct., 1863," p. . a quarter, and the average yield per acre to be 22 bushels. Shortly before that time, the works for a railway from Lew- isham to Tunbridge were commenced here, and, in addition to the principal works being in the immediate neighbourhood of this town, here was also established the depot for the whole of the works, so that a large number of persons was of necessity employed here. The Relative form of value (a.) The nature and import of this form In order to discover how the elementary expression of the value of a commodity lies hidden in the value-relation of two commodi- ties, we must, in the first place, consider the latter entirely apart from its quantitative aspect. Of the former 30,810 were under, and 92,620 over 20 years. a week)?" "I cannot speak to that." (n. Macleod, who has taken upon himself to dress up the confused ideas of Lombard Street in the most learned finery, is a successful cross between the superstitious mercantilists, and the enlightened Free-trade bagmen. By the purchase of his commodity he throws money into circulation, in order to withdraw it again by the sale of the same commodity. The nominal prices of commodities would rise, but the real re- lation between their values would remain unchanged. B. In this case, it is as if the spinner had spun 4 lbs. * Their second step dealt with the legal pauses for meals. See Karl Marx, 1. 125-130, p. If we now compare the two processes of producing value and of creating surplus-value, we see that the latter is nothing but the continuation of the former beyond a definite point. Centralisation completes the work of accumulation by ena- bling industrial capitalists to extend the scale of their operations. It must not be produced as the immediate means of subsistence of the pro- ducer himself. Division of labour with- in the workshop implies the undisputed authority of the capi- talist over men, that are but parts of a mechanism that belongs to him. In slave-labour, even that part of the working-day in which the slave is only replacing the value of his own means of existence, in which, therefore, in fact, he 1 Cf. "Zur Kritik der Politischen Oekonomie," p. There is not one single atom of its value-that does not owe its existence to unpaid labour. Trace out the effects upward to the small farmer, the better householder, and.... The villages are the property of Mr. G. By means oi 1 "Tis by this practice they keep all their goods and manufactures at such low rates." (Vanderlint, 1. Cammell & Co., are conducted on the same large scale as those of the above- mentioned John Brown & Co. The managing director had handed in his evidence to the Government Commissioner, Mr. White, in writing. Hence, a fall in the value of labour-power is also brought about by an increase in the productiveness of labour, and by a corresponding cheapening of commodities in those industries which supply the instruments of labour and the raw material, that form the material elements of the constant capital required for pro- ducing the necessaries of life. How, then, is the magnitude of this value to be measured? Some of the means of subsistence, such as food and fuel, are consumed daily, and a fresh supply must be provided daily. the minor improvements in machinery having for their object economy of power, the production of better work, the turning off more work in the same time, or in supplying the place of a child, a female, or a man, are constant, and although sometimes apparently of no great moment, have somewhat important results." 3 "Whenever a process requires peculiar dexterity and steadiness of hand, it is withdrawn, as soon as possible, from the cunning workman, who is prone to irregularities of many kinds, and it is placed in charge of a peculiar mechanism, so self-regulating that a 1 "The same cause which may increase the revenue of the country" (i.e., as Ricardo explains in the same passage, the revenues of landlords and capitalists, whose wealth, from the economic point of view, forms the Wealth of the Nation), "may at the same time render the population redundant and deteriorate the condition of the labourer." (Ricardo, 1. 2 The value of a commodity is expressed in its price before it goes into circulation, and is therefore a precedent condition of circulation, not its result. 2 But money itself is a commodity, an external object, capable of becoming the private property of any individual. For further details on this point, see Book [I., Part N 3 Fawcett, I. 3 The use and fabrication of instruments of labour, al- though existing in the germ among certain species of animals, is specifically characteristic of the human labour-process, and Frank- lin therefore defines man as a tool-making animal. First, a commodity comes face to face with money; the latter is the form taken by the value of the former, and exists in all its hard reality, in the pocket of the buyer. 29, 31. IV., ch. They must be sold, their value realised in money, this money afresh converted into capital, and so over and over again. Thousands of hands were suddenly required in these places, remote from towns; and Lancashire, in particular, being, till then, compara- tively thinly populated and barren, a population was all that she now wanted. What, ex- claimed one of their spokesmen, a disciple of Ricardo, Mr. Malthus preaches high rents, heavy taxes, &c, so that the pressure of the spur may constantly be kept on the industrious by unproduc- tive consumers! By all means, production, production on a con- stantly increasing scale, runs the shibboleth; but "production will, 1 Dr. Aikin: "Description of the Country from 30 to 40 miles round Man- chester." Lond., 1795, p. 96 and 127. And since, in the form of circulation now under consideration, money and commodities always come bodily face to face, one at the pos- itive pole of purchase, the other at the negative pole of sale, it is clear that the amount of the means of circulation required, is determined beforehand by the sum of the prices of all these com- modities. It places under protection a new category of workers, viz., the women over 18. The worst categories were the needle- women, silk-weavers and kid-glovers. I will each day spend, set in motion, put into action only as much of it as is compatible with its normal duration, and healthy development. the labour of the poor being the mines of the rich." 2 So also Bernard de Mandeville at the beginning of the eighteenth century: "It would be easier, where property is well secured, to live without money than without poor; for who would do the work? Commodity— Money— Commodity. 2 It is, however, clear that in any given economic formation of so- ciety, where not the exchange-value but the use-value of the prod- uct predominates, surplus-labour will be limited by a given set of wants which may be greater or less, and that here no boundless thirst for surplus-labour arises from the nature of the production itself. At first, the use of steam power meets with mere technical difficul- ties, such as unsteadiness in the machines, difficulty in controlling their speed, rapid wear and tear of the lighter machines, &c, all of which are soon overcome by experience. In like manner he procures his other means of subsistence and means of production. . . 85, p. As such, he shares with the miser the passion for wealth as wealth. My guide was a member of the Committee of the Unemployed My first call was on an ironworker who had been seven and twenty weeks out of employment. But, although boots are, in one sense, the basis of all social progress, and our capitalist is a de- cided "progressist," yet he does not manufacture boots for their own sake. On the other hand, this fact is a new lever in economising the means of payment. 181, 182.) "Nor can T conceive a greater curse upon a body of people, than to be thrown upon a spot of land, where the productions for subsistence and food were, in great measure, spontaneous, and the climate required or admitted little care for raiment and covering . (W. 04 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 2. (J. He then lies down upon the kneading- board, which is also the covering of the trough in which 1 The French chemist, Chevallier, in his treatise on the "sophistica- tions" of commodities, enumerates for many of the 600 or more articles which he passes in review, 10, 20, 30 different methods of adulteration. MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 391 labour it saves, in other words, that the degree of its productive- ness does not depend on the difference between its own value and the value of the implement it replaces. At night, they slept in pairs in one of the stifling holes into which the bedroom was divided by partitions of board. If therefore, as regards the use-values exchanged, both buyer and seller may possibly gain something, this is not the case as regards the exchange-values. The seller turned his commodity into money, in order thereby to satisfy some want; the hoarder did the same in order to keep his commodity in its money-shape, and the debtor in order to be able to pay; if he do not pay, his goods will be sold by the sheriff. The landlords, on their side, not only "indemnified" themselves for the Anti-Jacobin War, which they waged in the name of England, but enriched themselves enormously. A commodity may be the product of the most skilled labour, but its value, by equating it to the product of simple unskilled labour, represents a definite quantity of the latter labour alone. AVERAGE WEEKLY COST PER HEAD Year ended. 62-63. 155.) "L'argent est un signe d'une chose et la represente." (Montesquieu: "Esprit des Lois," (CEuvres, Lond. Od. The sum of £3 19 s. ... On the eve of the crisis, the bourgeois, with the self-sufficiency that springs from intoxicating prosperity, declares money to be a vain imagination. Skarbek: "Theorie des richesses sociales." Pans, 18.39, t. The workroom is in a private house. The value of labour-power is determined by the value of a given quantity of necessaries. Just as in the former the labour-process figures but as a means towards the self-expansion of capital, so in the latter it figures but as a means of reproducing as capital— i.e., as self-expanding val- ue,— the value advanced. But the peo- ple, from whom he buys the yarn and the machinery, pay for la- bour with a part of the purchase money, and so on until the whole £2,000 are spent in the payment of wages, i.e. , until the entire prod- uct represented by the £2,000 has been consumed by productive labourers. There is here no antagonism, as in the case of hoarding, between the money and commodities. * Here (from "which in its first stages" to p. * Every process of production, however, requires certain simple manipulations, which every man is capable of doing. of yarn: this represents the value of the instruments of labour that are consumed in 12 hours. 1 This was the gist of the matter, this the masters' interpretation of the 10 hours' law! These were the same unctuous Free-traders, perspiring with the love of humanity, who for full 10 years, dur- ing the Anti-Corn Law agitation, had preached to the operatives, by a reckoning of pounds, shillings, and pence, that with free importation of corn, and with the means possessed by English industry, 10 hours' labour would be quite enough to enrich the capitalists. 11 oz.), and 3d. " Even bad times are utilised by the manufac- turers, for making exceptional profits by excessive lowering of wages, i.e., by a direct robbery of the labourer's means of subsistence. "Reports of Insp. But in whatever proportion a given capi- tal breaks up into a constant and a variable part, whether the lat- ter is to the former as 1 : 2 or 1 : 10 or 1 : x, the law just laid down is not affected by this. At first the steam-engine replaces this labourer, afterwards he must replace the steam-engine. The more the di- vision increases, the more does the constant employment of a given number of labourers require a greater outlay of capital in tools, raw material, &c." (Storch: "Cours d'Econ. In fact, not only the number of births and deaths, but the absolute size of the families stand in inverse proportion to the height of wages, and therefore to the amount of means of subsist- ence of which the different categories of labourers dispose. This was done, so to say, to celebrate the inauguration of the new Free-trade era. These were ordinary export shirtings. 2 The suc- cess of those clauses proved for the first time the possibility of 1 It has been found out by experiment, that with each respiration of average intensity made by a healthy average individual, about 25 cubic inches of air are consumed, and that about 20 respirations are made in each minute. Sanderson's profit would thus fall to some extent, and this is the good Sandersonian reason why boys cannot learn their handicraft in the day. c, p. Suppose the price of cotton to be one day sixpence a pound, and the next day, in consequence of a failure of the cotton crop, a shilling a pound. 441) runs as follows in the original physiocratic work: "Les productions ne se paient qu'avec des productions." (Le Trosne, I. The demands of the new colonial markets could not be satisfied owing to the relatively small number of town operatives handed down from the middle ages, and the manufactures proper opened out new fields of production to the rural population, driven from the land by the dissolution of the feudal system. This is unskilful work, because, indeed, the owner of capital, after all, does some- thing more than the merely creating and preserving of the same: namely, the abstention from the enjoyment of it, for which he demands, e.g., inter- est." (1. x For example, in the manufacture of envelopes, one man folded the paper with the folder, another laid on the gum, a third turned the flap over, on which the device is impressed, a fourth em- bossed the device, and so on; and for each of these operations the envelope had to change hands. l'etablissement du prix des choses depend ton jours fondamentalement de la raison du total des choses au total des signes." (Mon- tesquieu, I. La richesse, comme le travail, et par le travail, donne un fruit annuel qui peut etre detruit chaque annee sans que le riche en devienne plus pauvre. If the market cannot stomach the whole quantity at the normal price of 2 shillings a yard, this proves that too great a portion of the total labour of the community has been expended in the form of weaving. When they assume this money-shape, com- modities strip off every trace of their natural use-value, and of the particular kind of labour to which they owe their creation, in order to transform themselves into the uniform, socially recog- nised incarnation of homogeneous human labour. 267.) Franklin is unconscious that by estimating the value of everything in labour, he makes abstrac- tion from any difference in the sorts of labour exchanged, and thus reduces them all to equal human labour. His aim is to produce not only a use-value, but a commodity also; not only use-value, but value; not only value, but at the same time surplus-value. The average of their individual compositions gives us the composition of the total capital in this branch of production. But the parents refused to sell the "half-timers" cheaper than the "full-timers." .Hence the substitution of machinery for the "half-timers." 2 Before the labour of women and of children under 10 years of age was forbid- den in mines, capitalists considered the employment of naked women and girls, often in company with men, so far sanctioned by 1 Hence in a communistic society there would be a very different scope for the employment of machinery than there can be in a bourgeois society. But whereas formerly an increase of capital by 20 per cent, would have sufficed to raise the demand for labour 20 per cent., now this latter rise requires a tripling of the original capital. The weight of gold represented in imagination by the prices or money-names of commodities, must confront those commodities, within the circulation, in the shape of coins or pieces of gold of a given denomination. . The inventions of Vaucanson, Arkwright, Watt, and others, were, however, practicable, only because those inventors found, ready to hand, a considerable number of skilled mechanical workmen, placed at their disposal by the manufac- turing period. It is true, he will in one hour transfer to the yarn more value, in the shape of cotton, than he will in half an hour; but that is only because in one hour he spins up more cot- ton than in half an hour. On the other hand, the linen's own value comes to the front, receives independ- ent expression, for it is only as being value that it is comparable with the coat as a thing of equal value, or exchangeable with the coat. Suppose that 400,000 yards of 1 MacCulloch, amongst others, is a past master in this pretentious cret- inism. Suppose a machine to be worth £1,000, and to wear out in 1,000 days. Let the quantities of labour-time respectively neces- sary for the production of the linen and the coat vary simul- taneously in the same direction and in the same proportion. 178. 1 .... The children themselves call the elementary schools, "natural schools," to distinguish them from these blood-sucking institutions, in which they are kept at work simply to get through the task, generally 30 yards daily, prescribed by their half-starved mothers. . 17.) The Theory of Hume was defended against the attacks of J. From his point of view, the whole process effectuates nothing more than the exchange of the product of his labour for the product of some one else's, nothing more than an exchange of products. 1 Owing to the excessive labour of their workpeople, both adult and non-adult, certain London houses where newspapers and books are printed, have got the ill-omened name of "slaughter-houses." 2 Similar ex- cesses are practised in book-binding, where the victims are chiefly women, girls, and children; young persons have to do heavy work in rope-walks and night-work in salt mines, candle manufacto- ries, and chemical works; young people are worked to death at turning the looms in silk weaving, when it is not carried on by machinery. Relative surplus-value is absolute, since it compels the absolute prolongation of the work- ing-day beyond the labour-time necessary to the existence of the labourer himself. A part of the functioning constant capital consists of instruments of labour, such as machinery, &c, which are not consumed, and therefore not reproduced, or replaced by new ones of the same kind, until after long periods of time. In other words, the more use-values, e.g., stockings, a working-day yields to the stocking-manufacturer, the richer is he in stockings. The more intense working-day of one nation would be represented by a greater sum of money than would the less intense day of another nation. As the working-day is A B + B C or A C, it varies with the variable quantity B C. We also know that in no other system of produc- tion is improvement so continuous, and the composition of the capital employed so constantly changing as in the factory system. * In some branches of industry, the girls and women work through the night together with the males. This problem Henry Maudsley solved in the first decade of this century by the invention of the slide rest, a tool that was soon made automatic, and in a modified form was applied to other constructive machines besides the lathe, for which it was originally intended. Thus, in the relative expres- sion of value of the linen, the coat assumes the form of equiva- lent, or of being directly exchangeable, only in relation to a single commodity, the linen. 1 See Karl Marx: "Zur Kritik, &c." "Theorien von der Masseinheit des Geldes," p. The duration of the surplus-labour, however, is ar- rived at, by subtracting the necessary labour-time from the total working-day. Such extemporised wildernesses or deserts ought to be put down by the decided interference of the Legislature." 734 CHAPTER XXVIII BLOODY LEGISLATION AGAINST THE EXPROPRIATED, FROM THE END OF THE 15TH CENTURY. 32. Thus additional labour, begotten of the greater tension of labour-power, can augment surplus-product and surplus- value (i.e., the subject-matter of accumulation), without corre- sponding augmentation in the constant part of capital. The official inspectors sum up the material condition of the agricultural labourer as follows: "Though living with the strictest frugality, his own wages are barely sufficient to provide food for an ordinary family and pay his rent, and he depends upon other sources for the means of clothing himself, his wife, and children. Way land, 1. Cruelty was, of course, the con- sequence. In 1833 they had howled out in threatening fashion, "if the liberty of working children of any age for 10 hours a day were taken away, it would stop their works." x It would be impossible for them to buy a sufficient num- ber of children over 13. Pitt opposed this, but confessed that the "condition of the poor was cruel." Finally, in 1813, the laws for the regulation of wages were repealed. Here as every- where else, we must distinguish between the increased produc- tiveness due to the development of the social process of production, and that due to the capitalist exploitation of that process. The value- form of commodities, money, is therefore now the end and aim of a sale, and that owing to a social necessity springing out of the process of circulation itself. [And since Marx wrote the above, the power-loom has invaded these facto- ries, and is now— 1886— rapidly superseding the hand-loom. 23.) 2 "The next evil is one which one would scarcely expect to find in a country which exports more labour than any other in the world, with the exception, perhaps, of China and England-^the impossibility of procuring a sufficient number of hands to clean the cotton. 1 The value of labour-power was determined, not only by the labour-time necessary to maintain the individual adult labourer, but also by that necessary to maintain his family. The knell of capitalist private property sounds. If the thing is useless, so is the labour contained in it; the labour does not count as labour, and therefore creates no value. 1866," p. As far, however, as concerns the genesis of the farmer, we can, so to say, put our hand on it, because it is a slow process evolving through many centuries. This is the horse-power meant in the text In ordinary language, and also here and there in quotations in this work, a distinction is drawn between the "nominal" and the "commercial" or "indicated" horse-power of the same engine The old or nominal horse power is calculated exclusively from the length of piston-stroke, and the diameter of the cylinder, and MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 339 self-acting mule spindles, with preparation, or 200 throstle spin- dles, or 15 looms for 40 inch cloth with the appliances for warping, sizing, &c." In the first case.it is the day's produce of 450 mule spindles, in the second, of 200 throstle spindles, in the third, of 15 power-looms, over which the daily cost of one horse-power, and the wear and tear of the machinery set in motion by that power, are spread; so that only a very minute value is transferred by such wear and tear to a pound of yarn or a yard of cloth. ... Told that she married the Queen's son. xvi. 4 The capitalist then takes his stand on the law of the ex- change of commodities. 5 The 70 medical men, whom Dr. Hunter examined in that district, were "won- derfully in accord" on this point. Gradually it became inevitably the recep- tacle of the metallic hoard of the country, and the centre of grav- ity of all commercial credit. Men were busy, however, in the open shed breaking paving-stones into macadam. He has the right to force him to do any work, no matter how disgusting, with whip and chains. A portion of the latter was now added to the profits of the farm. It is impossible, for instance, to squeeze as much surplus-value out of 2 as out of 24 labourers. If the owner of the iron were to go to the owner of some other commodity offered for exchange, and were to refer him to the price of the iron as proof that it was already money, he would get the same answer as St. Peter gave in heaven to Dante, when the latter recited the creed — "Assai bene e trascorsa D'esta moneta gia la lega e'l peso, Ma dimmi se tu l'hai nella tua borsa." A price therefore implies both that a commodity is exchange- able for money, and also that it must be so exchanged. Since the price of the labour-power is five shillings, 6 articles repre- 3 sent the necessary labour-time, and 3— articles the surplus-labour. History discloses no tragedy more horrible than the gradual extinction of the English hand-loom weavers, an extinction that was spread over several decades, and finally sealed in 1838. 13-14). Scarcely a room was to let. The collective labourer now possesses, in an equal degree of excellence, all the qualities requi- site for production, and expends them in the most economical man- ner, by exclusively employing all his organs, consisting of particular labourers, or groups of labourers, in performing their special func- tions. 1862. 1 1 Taking the usurer, that old-fashioned but ever renewed specimen of the capitalist for his text, Luther shows very aptly that the love of power is an element in the desire to get rich. xxxviii., n. The man Avorked in the stone yard of the workhouse for a certain ra- tion of food, and threepence per day. . 1 "Factory labour may be as pure and as excellent as domestic labour, and perhaps more so." ("Rep. 1 George II. These workmen are condemned to live, from their ninth year till their death, under this mental and bodily tor- ture." (F. 3 as, the increase of its productive power." (Ure, 1. ...The master cannot willingly see his labour supply being re- moved; he may think, and perhaps justly, that it is both wrong and unsound.... is thus no longer in force in my district (Lancashire). c, p. "Granting," says Chapelier, the reporter of the Select Committee on this law, "that wages ought to be a little higher than they are, ... l I assume (1) that commodities are sold at their value; (2) that the price of labour-power rises occasionally above its value, but never sinks below it. 4 1 Ure: "French translation, Philosophie des Manufactures." Paris, 1836, Vol. Again, although the la- bour of a fustian cutter demands great bodily exertion, and is at the same time unhealthy, yet it counts only as unskilled labour. In a great many of the factories, the old brutalities soon blossomed out again un- punished. One is a necessary condition to the existence of the other; they mu- tually call each other into existence. t. Al! fixed, -tast-irozen relations, with their train of ancient and venerable prejudices and opinions, are swept away, all new formed ones become antiquated before they can ossify. 58 and 70.) Bailey criticises the dogma mainly from the point of view of the process of circulation. B. " (Rob. If, for example, the capitalist have advanced £500, of which £400 is laid out in means of production and £100 in wages, and if the rate of surplus-value be 20%, the rate of profit will be 20 : 500, i.e., 4% and not 20%, Then follows a splendid example of Mill's method of han- dling the different historical forms of social production. "The mere sense that they exist subject to this species of ban, on the part of the landlords and their agents, has . The lengthening of the working-day, on the other hand, allows of production on an extended scale without any alteration in the amount of capital laid out on machinery and buildings. Though the Factory Act, that first and meagre concession wrung from capital, is limited to combining elementary education with work in the factory, there can be no doubt that when the working-class comes into power, as inevitably it must, technical instruction, both theoretical and practical, will take its proper place in the working-class schools. 1042.) In the year 1865 there were 3,217 coal mines in Great Brit- ain, and 12 inspectors. But those means of production play a double part. of Fact., 30th April, 1863," pp. We allude here only to inconvertible paper money issued by the State and having compulsory circulation. A Princess is a man." William Turner, age 12 — "Don't live in England. I. This change of form does not imply a change in the magnitude of the value. Labour estimated by the day, is much lower in Scotland than in England... Source des Revolutions et des Utopies pretendues Socialistes." Paris, 1857, t. that they ought to be high enough for him that receives them, to be free from that state of absolute dependence due to the want of the necessaries of life, and which is almost that of slavery," yet the workers must not be allowed to come to any understanding about their own interests, nor to act in common and thereby lessen their "absolute dependence, which is almost that of slavery;" because, forsooth, in doing this they injure "the freedom of their cidevant masters, the present entrepreneurs," and because a coalition against the despotism of the quondam masters of the corporations is — guess what! — is a restoration of { he corporations abolished by the French constitution. 4 Thus e.g., in the earthenware trade, Messrs. If it develops a one-sided speciality into a perfection, at the expense of the whole of a man's working capacity, it also begins to make a speciality of the absence of all development. Garli, Note to P. Products are therefore not only results, but also essential conditions of labour. In North- amptonshire, in 1795, the average weekly wage was 7s. A. But no man of humanity could wish to see them constant and unremitted. . To guard against false conclusions from the text, 1 ought here to remark that the English cotton industry, since it was placed under the Factory Act of 1850 with its regulations of labour-time, &c, must be regarded as the model industry of England. 27. and Charles XL Communal property — always distinct from the State prop- erty just dealt with — was an old Teutonic institution which lived on under cover of feudalism. In it he points out applications, many of which, as for instance, the steam-hammer, were not introduced till half a century later. So far, therefore, they do not confront each other as commodities, but only as products or use-values. Moreover, as regards the examined families of the agricultural population, it appeared that more than a fifth were with less than the esti- mated sufficiency of carbonaceous food, that more than one-third were withless than the estimated sufficiency of nitrogenous food, and that in three counties (Berkshire, Oxfordshire, and Somer- setshire), insufficiency of nitrogenous food was the average local diet." 1 Among the agricultural labourers, those of England, the wealthiest part of the United Kingdom, were the worst fed. When we know that a given value is sur- plus-value, we know how its owner came by it; but that does not alter the nature either of value or of money. This process, however, does not present itself as accumulation of capi- tal, nor as the function of a capitalist, so long as the labourer's means of production, and with them, his product and means of subsistence, do not confront him in the shape of capital. For the sake of conciseness I have classified them. 150, sqq. 2 "Wherever gold and silver have by law been made to perform the function of money or of a measure of value side by side, it has always been tried, but in vain, to treat them as one and the same material. And in a spirit yet more "liberal" than the English Factory Acts, the "Reglement orga- nique" has known how to facilitate its own evasion. The result of the one is, that the capitalist lives; of the other, that the labourer lives. Edit. x The same characters can, however, be assumed independently of the circulation of commodities. 1741.) "Would you interfere in every case with the employment of women where that employ- ment was degrading?" "It would become injurious, I think, in this way: the best feelings of Englishmen have been gained from the instruction of a mother . of Fact., 31st Oct., 1866," p. This contradiction comes to a head in those phases of indus- trial and commercial crises which are known as monetary crises. In some cases night-work, by relays, is carried on incessantly through the whole week, usually from Sun- day night until midnight of the following Saturday. 700 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION INCREASE OR DECREASE IN THE AREA UNDER CULTIVATION, PRODUCT Increase or Product Acres of Cultivated Land Decrease, 1865 Product per Acre 1864 1865 1864 Wheat, 276,483 266,989 9,494 Wheat, cwt., 13.3 Oats 1,814,886 1,745,228 69,658 Oats, . 646 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION This antagonistic character of capitalistic accumulation 1 is enunciated in various forms by political economists, although by them it is confounded with phenomena, certainly to some extent analogous, but nevertheless essentially distinct, and be- longing to precapitalistic modes of production. In it all freedom comes to an end both at law and in fact. That process, however, takes good care to prevent these self-conscious instruments from leav- ing it in the lurch, for it removes their product, as fast as it is made, from their pole to the opposite pole of capital. Receipts. 118. 1., pp. 300 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION denounces as an ineffable disgrace to the English working-class that they inscribed "the slavery of the Factory Acts" on the banner which they bore against capital, manfully striving for "perfect freedom of labour." 1 France limps slowly behind England. Their morality is at the lowest ebb, ... Polit." 2eme edit. To understand its march, we need not go back very far. It is, in reality, much easier to discover by analysis the earthly core of the misty creations of religion, than, conversely, it is, to develop from the actual relations of life the corresponding celestial- MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 373 All fully developed machinery consists of three essentially different parts, the motor mechanism, the transmitting mechanism, and finally the tool or working machine. Thus he saves himself from all further puzzling of the brain, and what is more, implicitly de- clares his opponent to be stupid enough to contend against, not the capitalistic employment of machinery, but machinery itself. They can arise and exist only when the development of the productive power of labour has not risen beyond a low stage, and when, therefore, the social relations within the sphere of material life, between man and man, and between man and Nature, are corre- spondingly narrow. 22 and 23.) 199 CHAPTER VIII CONSTANT CAPITAL AND VARIABLE CAPITAL The various factors of the labour-process play different parts in forming the value of the product. c. . Burke, 1. Not a single atom of the value of his old capital continues to exist. A certain quantity of iron therefore serves as the measure of the weight of the sugar, and represents, in relation to the sugar-loaf, weight embodied, the form of manifestation of weight. Price, like relative value in general, expresses the value of a commodity {e.g., a ton of iron), by stating that a given quan- tity of the equivalent {e.g., an ounce of gold), is directly exchange^ MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OF COMMODITIES 103 able for iron. One of the clauses of this petition is as follows: "Your petitioners, as parents, con- ceive that an additional hour of leisure will tend more to demoralise the chil- THE RATE OF SURPLUS-VALUE 229 of the Oxford Professor. Rep.," p. The inanimate ma- chinery not only wears out and depreciates from day to day, but a great part of it becomes so quickly super-annuated, by con- stant technical progress, that it can be replaced with advantage by new machinery after a few months. 202.) On the oth- er hand, "the labour question in some agricultural districts, particularly the arable, is becoming so serious in consequence of emigration, and the facili- ty afforded by railways for getting to large towns that I (the "I" is the steward of a great lord) think the services of children are most indispensable." (1. XXV., n. The surplus-value produced by prolongation of the working- day, I call absolute surplus-value. 1,543,161,789 lbs. It expresses practically this: This engine would be one of 50 horse-power, if it were driv- en with the same low pressure of steam, and the same slow piston speed, as in the days of Boulton and Watt. Sufferings have been inflicted in the Highlands scarcely less severe than those occasioned by the policy of the Norman kings. 3 This division of labour is purely technical. I allow that the workers are not a property, not the property of Lancashire and the masters; but they are the strength of both; they are the mental and trained power which cannot be replaced for a generation; the mere ma- chinery which they work might much of it be beneficially replaced, nay improved, in a twelvemonth. On that groundwork each separate branch of production acquires empirically the form that is technically suited to it, slowly perfects it, and, so soon as a given degree of maturity has been reached, rapidly crystallises that form. Therefore, if no more than 1 lb. All but one have come this morning. On Sundays the men must attend twice or three times during the day for an hour or two to make prep- arations for the next day's bread. In former times, capital resorted to legislation, whenever necessary, to enforce its proprietary rights over the free labourer. . They are peculiarly the creatures of civil institutions, 2 which have recognised that individuals may acquire 1 Bernard de Mandeville: "The Fable of the Bees," 5th edition, Lon- don, 1728. 116 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION the same movement that as regards the commodity consists of two processes of an antithetical character, is, when considered as the movement of the money, always one and the same process, a continued change of places with ever fresh commodities. for the reduction in time, together 2s. ABSOLUTE AND RELATIVE SURPLUS-VALUE 5I5. What is the length of time dur- ing which capital may consume the labour-power whose daily value it buys? . This form of value is elementary and the same for all, therefore general. Never mind! Say declares that, in consequence of increased productivity, every one now receives in return for a given equivalent two pairs of stockings instead of one as before. Therefore, though a machine cost as much as the labour-power displaced by it costs, yet the labour materialised in it is even then much less than the living labour it replaces. We have one old man more than 70 years of age to inspect more than 130 collieries." "You wish to have a class of sub-inspectors?" "Yes." (ns. (See Ch. I. In the one case, more silver would be current than gold was before, in the other case, less gold would be current than silver was before. First Report, &c, p. c, n. Thus, at an early period in paper manufacture, the tear- ing up of the rags was done by paper-mills; and in metal works, the pounding of the ores was effected by stamping mills. Already dis- counted in the regular factory districts by the cotton famine, which threw much capital from its wonted sphere into the great centres of the money-market, the crisis assumed, at this time, an especially financial character. But, for all that, wisdom of this kind flourishes even now in certain circles under the name of "science." Never has any school played more tricks with the word science, than that of Proudhon, for "wo Begriffe fehlen, Da stellt zur rechten Zeit ein Wort sich ein." COMMODITIES 69 were, at the same time, to share in the relative form of value, it would have to serve as its own equivalent. Needlework, in the main, ... 2 Nevertheless the horse was extensive- 1 "The union of all these simple instruments, set in motion by a single motor, constitutes a machine." (Babbage, 1. there are materialised the 48 hours of labour expended, before the commencement of the spinning process, on the means of 2 production; and in the remaining Tnths or 4 lbs. L The commodity that figures as universal equivalent, is, on the other hand, excluded from the relative value-form. All the English methods hitherto considered culminated in "clearing." As we saw in the picture of modern conditions given in a former chapter, where there are no more independent peasants to get rid of, the "clearing" of cottages begins; so that the agricultural labourers do not find on the soil cultivated by them even the spot necessary for their own housing. The thief, the interpreter, and the seller, were the chief agents in this trade, native princes the chief sellers. Carmarthenshire is the breeding ground of the mining population and their hospital. If the conditions of production, in other words, if the productive power of labour remain constant, the same amount of social labour-time must, both before and after the change in price, be expended in the reproduction of a quarter of wheat. Let Chanticleer announce the morn in vain! Deo has commanded the work of the girls to be done by the Nymphs, and now they skip lightly over the wheels, so that the shaken axles revolve with their spokes and pull round the load of the revolving stones. For years the over-crowd- ing of rural labourers' dwellings has been a matter of deep con- cern, not only to persons who care for sanitary good, but to per^ sons who care for decent and moral life. Hence, concentration of large masses of the means of production in the hands of individual capitalists, is a material condition for the co-operation of wage-labour- ers, and the extent of the co-operation or the scale of production, depends on the extent of this concentration. Fact., 31st October, 1865," p. 1 The cry of the people and the legislation directed, for 150 years after Henry VII., against the expropriation of the small farmers and peasants, were alike fruitless. He will remember that as far as we have at present gone, only the independent la- bourer, and therefore only the labourer legally qualified to act for himself, enters as a vendor of a commodity into a contract with the capitalist. The history of this expropriation, in different countries, assumes different aspects, and runs through its various phases in different orders of succession, and at different periods. First, the decomposition of a process of production into its various successive steps coincides, here, strictly with the resolu- tion of a handicraft into its successive manual operations. It was attested by numerous witnesses in various grades of life, that to these insanitary in- fluences, and many more, the underfed peasant was nightly exposed, and of the result, a debilitated and scrofulous people, there was no w T ant of evidence ....The statements of the relieving officers of Carmarthenshire and Cardigan- shire show in a striking way the same state of things. 33. Nevertheless, when the producers of coats and boots compare those articles with linen, or, what is the same thing, with gold or silver, as the uni- versal equivalent, they express the relation between their own private labour and the collective labour of society in the same absurd form. Not long after there will come a demand for bullion to be exported again. The manifesto alludes, not without irony, to the fact, that the greatest profit-monger amongst the building masters, a certain Sir M. If, on the other hand, the price of labour-power differs from its value, in like manner the price of labour differs from its so-called value. Such an employ- ment of refuse may be seen in the large machine works at Manches- ter, where mountains of iron turnings are carted away to the found- ry in the evening, in order the next morning to re-appear in the workshops as solid masses of iron. Either because the capitalist uses it as a pretext for actu- ally lowering the price of labour, or because increased productive power of labour is accompanied by an increased intensity of the same. whereas hunger is not only a peaceable, silent, unremitted pres- sure, but as the most natural motive to industry and labour, it calls forth the most powerful exertions." Everything therefore depends upon making hunger permanent among the working- class, and for this, according to Townsend, the principle of popu- lation, especially active among the poor, provides. You may be a model citizen, perhaps a member of the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, and in the odour of sanctity to boot; but the thing that you represent face to face with me has no heart in its breast. "The physical appearance of the cotton operatives is unquestionably improved. Dr. Ure, the Pindar of the automatic factory, describes it, on the one hand as "Combined co-operation of many orders of work- people, adult and young, in tending with assiduous skill, a system of productive machines, continuously impelled by a central power" the prime mover); on the other hand, as "a vast automaton, corn- Quantity Exported, 1848. The process of circulation, therefore, does not, like direct barter of products, become extinguished upon the use-values changing places and hands. "The first Spanish settlers in Saint Domingo did not obtain labourers from Spain. The Act, there- fore, ordains the rebuilding of the decayed farm-steads, and fixes a proportion between corn land and pasture land, &c. of Insp. THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 669 men worked; but on the day of my visit the pens were so snowed up that nobody could sit in them. 2 1. COMMODITIES 45 and linen, are combinations of special productive activities with cloth and yarn, while the values, coat and linen, are, on the other hand, mere homogeneous congelations of undifferentiated labour, so the labour embodied in these latter values does not count by virtue of its productive relation to cloth and yarn, but only as being expenditure of human labour-power. Example: Bradford (Yorkshire). It would indicate that the 2 constituent parts of the working- day, necessary-labour and surplus-labour time, were equal in ex- tent, but not how long each of these two constituent parts was. This is one, though not the chief, cause of a phenomenon which, at first, puzzles the student of English history. III. 3, 4. But when people plun- der for centuries, there must always be something at hand fof them to seize, the objects of plunder must be continually reproduced. And as extractive industry and agriculture supply manufacturing industry with its raw materials and those of its instruments of labour, the additional product the former have created without additional advance of capital, tells also in fa- vour of the latter. 1 From 1815 to 1825 no person- al estate of more than £1,000,000 came under the succession duty; from 1825 to 1855, however, 8 did; and 4 from 1856 to June, 1859, i.e., in 4 — years. It manifests itself as this two-fold thing, that it is, as soon as its value assumes an independent form — viz., the form of exchange-value. The value of money being assumed to be constant, an average so- cial working-day of 12 hours always produces the same new value, six shillings, no matter how this sum may be apportioned between surplus-value and wages. And now, gentlemen, "farewell, and may we meet again in yonder better world, but not before." Senior invented the battle cry of the "last hour" in 1836. He is at liberty to set the 100 men to work, without letting them co-operate. 546 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION clear that he cannot obtain for himself the value of the product of 6 hours if he is employed less than 12 hours. The operatives are subject to great fluctuation from the constant experimentalising of the manufacturers... In this respect their conquest of social power appears as the fruit of a victorious struggle both against feudal lordship and its revolting prerogatives, and against the guilds and the fetters they laid on the free development of production and the free exploitation of man by man. or 3d." ("Children's Employment Com., III. The production of a relative surplus-population, or the set- ting free of labourers, goes on therefore yet more rapidly than 1 Harriet Martineau, "A Manchester Strike," 1832, p. This result, however, would be 1 The value of his average daily wages is determined by what the la- bourer requires "so as to live, labour, and generate." (Wm. Petty: "Political Anatomy of Ireland," 1672, p. On the other hand, the expanded expression of relative value, the endless series of equations, has now become the form peculiar to the relative value of the money-commodity. He must be his customer as well as his tenant. 25,394 No. 52,037 Acres. Diligence in some compels idleness in others. Here we have, in the place of the isolated machine, a mechanical monster whose body fills whole factories, and whose demon power, 382 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION at first veiled under the slow and measured motions of his giant limbs, at length breaks out into the fast and furious whirl of his countless working organs. The sum of the values in circulation can clearly not be augmented by any change in their distribution, any more than the quantity of the precious metals in a country by a Jew selling a Queen Anne's farthing for a guinea. If he loses his slave, he loses capital that can only be restored by new outlay in the slave-mart. It functions as money, on the one hand, when it has to be present in its own golden person. 36.) 3 Senior, I. Leaving day-work alone open to boys would not answer this purpose." And why not? 4 3d. c, pp. The competition among the master- 1 It a factory hand, e.g., refused to work the customary long hours, "he would very shortly be replaced by somebody who would work any length of time, and thus be thrown out of employment." ("Reports of inspectors of Fact.," 30th April, 1848, Evidence, p. But they are founded either on the immature devel- opment of man individually, who has not yet severed the um- bilical cord that unites him with his fellowmen in a primitive tribal community, or upon direct relations of subjection. Beyond this he does absolutely nothing. Although we come across the first beginnings of capitalist production as early as the 14th or 15th century, sporadically, in certain towns of the Mediterranean, the capi- talistic era dates from the 16th century. Hence arises one of the causes of the great size of manufacturing establishments." (C. "It is one of the most melancholy features in the social state of this country," says Glad- stone, "that while there was a decrease in the consuming powers of the people, and while there was an increase in the privations and distress of the labouring class and operatives, there was at the same time a constant accumulation of wealth in the upper classes, and a constant increase of capital." 8 Thus spake this unctuous min- ister in the House of Commons of February 13th, 1843. It helps to create use-value without con- tributing to the formation of exchange-value. But then this does not generally happen, where there is most fertile land." ("Observations on Certain Verbal Disputes, &c." pp. In Hamburg it was burnt in public by order of the Senate. . To it gold and silver, when serving as money, did not represent a social relation between producers, but were natural objects with strange social properties. The recent scientific discovery, that the products of labour, so far as they are values, are but material expressions of the human labour spent in their production, marks, indeed, an epoch in the history of the development of the human race, but, by no means, dissipates the mist through which the social character of labour appears to us to be an objective character of the products them- selves. . In the place of the lace-schools we find here the "straw-plait schools." The children commence their instruction in straw-plaiting generally in their 4th, often between their 3rd and 4th year. He says: "Prudential habits with regard to marriage, carried to a considerable extent among the labouring class of a country mainly depending upon manufactures and commerce, might injure it. 16, 17.) "The same cause which may increase the net revenue of the country may at the same time ren- der the population redundant, and deteriorate the condition of the labourer." (Ricardo, 1. 6 1. were driven to commit sui- cide . The erroneous opinion that it is, on the contrary, prices that are determined by the quantity of the circulating medium, and that the latter depends on the quantity of the precious 1 "There is a certain measure and proportion of money requisite to drive the trade of a nation, more or less than which would prejudice the same. 4 I. (Hegel, 1. * 1 This incongruity between the magnitude ot value and its relative expression has, with customary ingenuity, been exploited by vulgar econ- COMMODITIES 55 3. . But," he adds sympathetically, "I can understand the loss of time not being liked." The report of the Commission opines with naivete that the fear of some "leading firms" of losing time, i.e., the time for appropriating the labour of others, and thence losing profit is not a sufficient reason for allowing children under 13, and young persons under 18, working 12 to 16 hours per day, to lose their dinner, nor for giving it to them as coal and water are supplied to the steam-engine, soap to wool, oil to the wheel — as merely auxiliary material to the instruments of labour, during the process of production itself. (3.) The absolute value of labour-power can change only in consequence of the reaction exercised by the prolongation of sur- plus-labour upon the wear and tear of labour-power. On this assumption we have seen that the relative magnitudes of surplus-value and of price of labour-power are determined by three circumstances; (1) the length of the working-day, or the extensive magnitude of labour; (2) the normal intensity of labour, its intensive magnitude, whereby a given quantity of labour is expended in a given time; (3) the productiveness of labour, whereby the same quantum of labour yields, in a given time, a greater or less quantum of product, dependent on the degree of 1 Note in the 3rd German edition.— -The case considered at pages 316- 319 is here of course omitted. We have seen how, along with the continual fluctuations in the ex- tent and rapidity of the circulation of commodities and in their prices, the quantity of money current unceasingly ebbs and flows. Soldier Working Coachmaker . The condition of the adult male operatives, even during the years of prosperity, may be judged from the note sub- joined. Air. That mighty substitute for labour and labourers was forthwith changed into a means for increasing the number of wage-labourers by enrolling, under the direct sway of capital, every member of the workman's family, without distinc- tion of age or sex. Now, when the fatal year, 1862, came, the old farce was repeated. But this, under the conditions supposed above, depends on the mass of labour-power, or the number of labourers whom he exploits, and this number in its turn is determined by the amount of the variable capital ad- vanced. 184.) 166 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION from circulation. Wherever a part of society possesses the monopoly of the means of production, the labourer, free or not free, must add to the working-time necessa- ry for his own maintenance an extra working-time in order to pro- duce the means of subsistence for the owners of the means of pro- duction, 1 whether this proprietor be the Athenian xaXo; xayaOos, Etruscan theocrat, civis Romanus, Norman baron, American slave-owner, Wallachian Boyard, modern landlord or capitalist. The minimum limit of the value of labour-power is deter- mined by the value of the commodities, without the daily supply of which the labourer cannot renew his vital energy, consequently by the value of those means of subsistence that are physically indispensable. 13.)Thesame "high" Court of Justice discovered, during the Ameri- can Civil War, a verbal ambiguity which exactly reversed the meaning ol the law against the arming of pirate ships. Since the process of produc- tion is also the process by which the capitalist consumes labour- power, the product of the labourer is incessantly converted, not only into commodities, but into capital, into value that sucks up the value-creating power, into means of subsistence that buy the person of the labourer, into means of production that command the producers. These others, with respect to the former, play the passive parts of equivalents. Sec- ond, orphans and pauper children. 2 Between 1851 and 1874, the total number of emigrants amounted to 2,325,922. Value of this description may be made to answer all the purposes of intrinsic value, and supersede even the necessity for a standard, provided only the quantity of issues be kept under due limitation." (Fullarton: "Regulation of Currencies," London, 1845, p. MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 439 that be called compensation to the carpet-makers, thrown on the streets? 2 In the London Standard of October 26, 1861, there is a report of pro- ceedings of the firm of John Bright & Co., before the Rochdale magistrates "to prosecute for intimidation the agents of the Carpet Weavers Trades' Union. He had now come home to dinner quite hungry, as he told us with a melancholy smile, and his dinner consisted of a couple of slices of bread and dripping, and a cup of milkless tea The next door at which we knocked was opened by a middle-aged woman, who, without say- ing a word, led us into a little back parlour, in which sat all her family, silent and fixedly staring at a rapidly dying fire. 8 A new and internation- al division of labour, a division suited to the requirements of the chief centres of modern industry springs up, and converts one part of the globe into a chiefly agricultural field of production, for sup- plying the other part which remains a chiefly industrial field. II. By a dexterous turn, therefore, Mr. Ricardo makes the value of labour depend on the quantity of labour re- quired to produce wages; or, to give him the benefit of his own language, he maintains, that the value of labour is to be estimated by the quantity of la- bour required to produce wages; by which he means the quantity of labour required to produce the money or commodities given to the labourer. Econ^ &c.,"2nd Ed., Glasgow, 1832, pp. 3 "One cannot see these unfortunates (in the gold mines between Egypt, Ethiopia, and Arabia) who cannot even have their bodies clean, or their nakedness clothed, without pitying their miserable lot. It towered up as an econom- ic work of art, on the broad foundation of the town handi- crafts, and of the rural domestic industries. If the same working-day now supplies, in consequence of the doubled productiveness of labour, 48 pieces instead of 24, and all other circumstances remain unchanged, 1 3 then the piece-wage falls from 1^-d. The value of a commodity, there- fore, varies directly as the quantity, and inversely as the produc- tiveness, of the labour incorporated in it. In such a case, he supplies himself with 1 "This is a remarkably peculiar property of productive labour. this "very intelligent gentleman" then wrote a letter 1 in the Glas- gow Daily Mail of April 25th, 1849, with the title, "The relay sys- tem," in which among other things the following grotesquely naive passage occurs: "Let us now. The difficul- ties in fact would be so great that they would very likely lead to the giving up of night-work altogether, and "as far as the work itself is concerned," says E. (Galiani: Delia Moneta, p 221, V III of Custodi's collection of "Scrittori Classici Italiani di Economia Politica." Parte Moderna, Milano, 1803.) COMMODITIES 75 gold and a pound of iron in spite of their different physical and chemical qualities appear to be of equal weight. Nathaniel Forster, D. This exploitation is more shameless in the so-called do- mestic industry than in manufactures, and that because the power of resistance in the labourers decreases with their dissemina- tion; because a whole series of plundering parasites insinuate them- selves between the employer and the workman; because a domestic industry has always to compete either with the factory system, or with manufacturing in the same branch of production; because poverty robs the workman of the conditions most essential to his labour, of space, light and ventilation; because employment be- comes more and more irregular; and, finally, because in these the last resorts of the masses made "redundant" by Modern Industry and Agriculture, competition for work attains its maximum. 1803, vol. Mirabeau's "Impossible! ne me dites jamais ce bete de mot!" is particularly applicable to modern technology. "His (the farm labour- er's) keep is reckoned at about five pence a day, but in many districts it was THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 681 'To the insufficient quantity and miserable quality of the house accommodation generally had," says Dr. Simon, in his official Health Report, "by our agricultural labourers, almost every page of Dr. Hunter's report bears testimony. l To be consistent therefore, the upholders of the delusion that surplus-value has its origin in a nominal rise of prices or in the privilege which the seller has of selling too dear, must assume the existence of a class that only buys and does not sell, i.e., only consumes and does not produce. 1 We should, in this way, get £1,500 on one side and £1,590 on the other. "The Rev. Many of them died of starvation, many with families vege- tated for a long time on2-^d. Polit." Paris, 1815), Ganilh enumerates in a striking manner in opposition to the "Physio- crats" the long series of previous processes necessary before agriculture properly so called can commence. "A king of England might EXPROPRIATION OF AGRICULTURAL POPULATION 729 as well claim to drive his subjects into the sea," says Professor Newman. In the latter case, the outlay of constant capital increases in proportion to the mass of labour set in action; in the former that increase is much smaller. In another part of the yard was a rickety little wooden house, and when we opened the door of it, we found it filled with men who were huddled together shoulder to shoulder, for the warmth of one another's bodies and breath. Comm., Third Rep.," pp. — F. c, p. of Book III. Both, therefore, possess the general property of being human labour, and may, therefore, in certain cases, such as in the production of value, have to be considered under this aspect alone. Dinner is only to last 1 hour, and the "afternoon-sleep of half an hour" is only allowed between the middle of May and the middle of August. 36 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION standards of measure for the quantities of these useful objects. 413.) I quote Macaulay, because as systematic falsifier of history he minimises as much as possible facts of this kind. 3 W. We now come to the period that follows the introduction ol the Ten Hours' Act in 1847 into the English cotton, woollen, silk, and flax mills. Schweig- hauser, 1802.) MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OP COMMODITIES 101 the standard of money. Id. 1 Even in this miserable state of things, however, the inventive spirit of the master never stood still, but was exercised in making deductions from wages. Hence commodities must be realised as values before they can be realised as use-values. Those ... Whence they infer the necessity of even the necessaries of life being made dear by taxes, or any other means, to compel the working artisan and manufacturer to labour the whole six days in the week, without ceasing. You preach to me constantly the gospel of "saving" and "abstinence." Good! I will, like a sensible saving owner, husband my sole wealth, labour-power, and abstain from all foolish waste of it. But then demand and supply also cease to explain anything. He generally becomes as stupid and ignorant as it is pos- sible for a human creature to become." After describing the stu- pidity of the detail labourer he goes on: "The uniformity of his stationary life naturally corrupts the courage of his mind .... The number of the labourers simultaneously employed depends, on its side, on the ratio of the variable to the constant capital. . 4 In 1860 the people expropriated by force were exported to Canada un- der false pretences. To him its use-value belongs during one working-day. But these commodities, before coming to market, were part of the general annual product, part of the total mass of objects of every kind, into which the sum of the individual capi- tals, i.e., the total capital of society, had been converted in the course of the year, and of which each capitalist had in hand only an aliquot part. Let us see what Ricardo, e.g., says: "It must be understood that all the pro- ductions of a country are consumed; but it makes the greatest difference imaginable whether they are consumed by those who reproduce, or by those who do not reproduce another value. Self-earned private property, that is based, so to say, on the fusing together of the isolated, independent labouring-individual with the conditions of his labour, is supplanted by capitalistic private property, which rests on exploitation of the nominally free labour of others, i.e., on wage-labour. Then the collective working-day of 12 men simultaneously employed, consists of 144 hours; and although the labour of each of the dozen men may deviate more or less from av- erage social labour, each of them requiring a different time for the same operation, yet since the working-day of each is one-twelfth of the collective working-day of 144 hours, it possesses the quali- ties of an average social working-day. He works for a quarter of an hour (sometimes more, sometimes less) after 2 p. c. 3 3 6 - 6. The fact that on this occasion the funds are derived from the unpaid labour of his workers makes absolute- ly no difference. On the contrary, with a given amount of population, this limit is formed by the possi- ble lengthening of the working-day. If the work was very pressing, they could earn more. c, pp. Finally, the substitution of the steam-engine for man gives in this, as in all similar revolutions, the finishing blow. In one, the col- lective labourer, or social body of labour, appears as the domin- ant subject, and the mechanical automaton as the object; in the other, the automaton itself is the subject, and the workmen are merely conscious organs, co-ordinate with the unconscious organs of the automaton, and together with them, subordinated to the central moving-power. 197,343,655 lbs. to 9s. 1777, pp. The number of inhabited houses fell, from 1851-1861, by 52,990. 656 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION One half, or -p^ of the industrial labour categories investi- gated, had absolutely no beer, 28% no milk. of Insp. 2 So, at the present time, in those branches of the lace manufacture not yet subject to the Factory Act, it is maintained that the meal- times cannot be regular owing to the different periods required by the various kinds of lace for drying, which periods vary from three minutes up to an hour and more. Leyde, 1766," t. It is compatible only with a system of production, and a society, moving within narrow and more or less primitive bounds. In the case we are considering the same working-time is materialised in the 10 lbs. The great sensation this pamphlet caused, was due solely to party interest. Jacob doubts whether gold has ever been paid for at its full value. 2 John Stuart Mill, in his "Principles of Political Economy," says: "The really exhausting and the really repulsive labours instead of being bet- ter paid than others, are almost invariably paid the worst of all... Both could only have been manufactured in England. Then one can without difficulty subsume everything under this category. Edinburgh, v. Rep.," p. 2 The rise of the nominal daily or weekly wages may therefore be accompanied by a price of labour that remains stationary or falls. She is also cook, and all the servant we have. The rule, that the labour-time expended on a commodity should not exceed that which is socially necessary for its production, appears, in the production of commodities generally, to be established by the mere effect of competition; since, to express ourselves superfi- cially, each single producer is obliged to sell his commodity at its market-price. 2 "I would desire, indeed, no more convincing evidence of the compe- tency of the machinery of the hoards in specie-paying countries to perform every necessary office of international adjustment, without any sensible aid from the general circulation, than the facility with which France, when but just recovering from the shock of a destructive foreign invasion, complet- ed within the space of 27 months the payment of her forced contribution of nearly 20 millions to the allied powers, and a considerable proportion of the sum in specie, without any perceptible contraction or derangement of her domestic currency, or even any alarming fluctuation of her exchanges." (Fullarton, 1. This gives rise partly to state subsidies to private persons, as in France in the time of Colbert, and as in many German states up to our own epoch; partly to the formation of societies with legal mo- nopoly for the exploitation of certain branches of industry and com- merce, the fore-runners of our modern joint-stock companies. . Income from profits. £2,000 is £2,000. It consequently makes no alteration whatever in the relation between surplus-value and value of labour-power. Sanderson, of the firm of Sanderson, Bros., & Co., steel rolling-mills and forges, Attercliffe, says: "Great difficulty would be caused by preventing boys un- der 18 from working at night. . 84-85.) In Scotland, the abolition of serfdom took place some centu- ries later than in England. xiii. ... With a given value of labour-power, therefore, the mag- nitude of the variable capital varies directly as the number of labourers employed simultaneously. to 8.30 p. the Congress proposes eight hours as the le- gal limit of the working-day." Thus the movement of the working-class on both sides of the Atlantic, that had grown instinctively out of the conditions of production themselves, endorsed the words of the English Factory Inspector, R. The gap which emigration causes here, limits not only the local demand for labour, but also the incomes of small shopkeepers, artisans, tradespeople generally. s. This naive form of hoarding becomes perpetuated in those communities in which the traditional mode of production is carried on for the supply of a fixed and limited circle of home wants. Not only does the scale of reproduction materially extend, but the production of surplus-value increases more rapidly than the value of the additional capital. Immense tracts of land, much of which is described in the statistical account of Scotland as having a pasturage in richness and extent of very superior description, are thus shut out from all cultivation and improvement, and are solely devoted to the sport of a few persons for a very brief period of the year." The London Economist of June 2, 1866, says, "Amongst the items of news in a Scotch paper of last week, we read... Although, in the case we have supposed, we are ignorant of the actual length of the working-day, and of the dura- tion in days or weeks of the labour-process, as also of the number of labourers employed, yet the rate of surplus-value— accurately dis- ! i n .. Formerly divided among a number of small producers, who cultivated it themselves and with their families spun it in retail fashion, it is now concen- trated in the hand of one capitalist, who sets others to spin and weave it for him. For example, the outlay on raw material is 30 times as great, for the capitalist who employs 300 men, as it is for each of the 30 cap- italists who employ 10 men. And since sales and purchases are negotiated solely between par- ticular individuals, it is not admissible to seek here for relations between whole social classes. EXCHANGE gg Man has often made man himself, under the form of slaves, serve as the primitive material of money, but has never used land for that purpose. To what extent this transformation depends upon the general conditions of pro- duction, is shown, to take one example, by the fact that the Roman Empire twice failed in its attempt to levy all contributions in money. 74, 75.) They resemble in fact the 30,000 "gallant Highlanders" whom Glasgow pigs together in its wynds and closes, with prostitutes and thieves. But this much is clear at the first glance: that this system annulled the whole Factory Act, not only in the spirit, but in the letter. 2 I. The Yankees have given to articles thus fitted together, the name of "assembled articles," a name they deserve, for being an assemblage of taxes. It is these absolute movements of the accumulation of capital which are reflected as relative move- ments of the mass of exploitable labour-power, and therefore seem produced by the latter' s own independent movement. Apart from circulation, the commodity-owner is in relation only with his own commodity. The latter kind is due to the elements. of Fact.," 30th April, 1859, pp. In both cases the value of labour-power falls. Its intro- duction went at once to perfect all machinery, to cheapen it, and to stimulate invention and improvement." 2 One of these machines, used for forging paddle-wheel shafts in Lon- don, is called "Thor." It forges a shaft of 16y 2 tons with as much ease as a blacksmith forges a horse-shoe. everything, in short, which cannot be done unless a great many pairs of hands help each other in the same undivided employment and at the same time" (E. as late as 7 o'clock in the evening." (1. Thus: Sheep in 1865, 3,688,742, but in 1856, 3,694,294. Hence the co-operative character of the labour-process is, in the latter case, a technical necessity dictated by the instrument of labour itself. Finally, the improvements in the operative machines have, while reducing their size, in- creased their speed and efficiency, as in the modern power-loom; or, while increasing the size of their framework, have also in- creased the extent and number of their working parts, as in spin- ning-mules, or have added to the speed of these working parts by imperceptible alterations of detail, such as those which ten years ago increased the speed of the spindles in self-acting mules by one- fifth. . The cash is given in the shop" {i.e., the Tommy shop which belongs to the master), "the men take it on one side and lay it out on the other." ("Children's Employment Commission, III. Centralisation may result from a mere change in the distribution of capitals already existing, from a simple alteration in the quantitative grouping of the component parts of social capital. rial (August 1863), in which the London day-labourers in fish and poultry shops asked for the abolition of Sunday labour, states that their work lasts for the first 6 days of the week on an average 15 hours a-day, and on Sunday 8-10 hours. Sicilien "Historische Bibliothek," book III, 12-14. 90. lb. 107, et seq. But the accumulation of capital pre- supposes surplus-value; surplus-value pre-supposes capitalistic production; capitalistic production pre-supposes the pre-exist- ence of considerable masses of capital and of labour-power in the hands of producers of commodities. It is altogether erroneous to suppose that modern machinery originally appropriated those operations alone, which division of labour had simpli- fied. Addington: "Inquiry into the Reasons for or against Enclosing Open Fields." London, 1772, pp. . But as soon as the question of property crops up, it becomes a sacred duty to pro- claim the intellectual food of the infant as the one thing fit for all ages and for all stages of development. Think it is a country, but didn't know before." John Morris, age 14 — "Have heard say that God made the world, and that all the people was drownded but one; heard say that one was a little bird." William Smith, age 15 — "God made man, man made woman." Edward Taylor, age 15 — "Do not know of London." Henry Matthewman, age 17 — "Had been to chapel, but missed a good many times lately. and at the same period of the day. At the same time, the interminable series of value equations implies, that as regards the value of a commodity, it is a matter of indifference under what particular form, or kind, of use-value it appears. — Ed. 1 Robert Owen, the father of Co-operative Factories and Stores, but who, as before remarked, in no way shared the illusions of his followers with regard 594 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION SECTION 10.— MODERN INDUSTRY AND AGRICULTURE The revolution called forth by modern industry in agricul- ture, and in the social relations of agricultural producers, will be investigated later on. Its fisheries, marine, manufactures, surpassed those of any other country. On the contrary, it is the mode in which they gained a livelihood that explains why here politics, and there Catholicism, played the chief part. Saxony, Switzerland, "This comparison," says Mr. Redgrave, "is yet more unfa- vourable to Great Britain, inasmuch as there is so large a number of factories in which weaving by power is carried on in conjunction with spinning [whilst in the table the weavers are not deducted] , and the factories abroad are chiefly spinning factories; if it were possible to compare like with like, strictly, I could find many cot- ton spinning factories in my district in which mules containing 2,200 spindles are minded by one man (the "minder") and two as- sistants only, turning off daily 220 lbs. . A long stick served as prop to prevent the chimney from falling. What is more to the one is less to the other, and vice versa. 3 If, at first, the workman sells his labour-power to capital, because the material means of producing a commodity fail him, now his very labour-power refuses its services unless it has been sold to capital. c, Vol. In our example, C =£410 const. Capitalistic appropriation and personal appropriation, whether of science or of material wealth, are, however, MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 387 for the purposes of telegraphy, &c, necessitates a costly and ex- tensive apparatus. And this holds generally with the exception of certain tracts of Ulster; in the south, in the counties of Cork, Limerick, Kilkenny, &c; in the east, in Wicklow, Wexford, &c; in the centre of Ireland, in King's and Queen's County, Dublin, &c; in the west, in Sligo, Roscommon, Mayo, Galway, &c. J. Hence there is a great difference between the value of a machine, and the value transferred in a given time by that machine to the product. 1 Richard Jones, who died a few years ago, and was the successor of Mai thus in the chair of Political Economy at Haileybury College, discusses this point well in the light of two important facts. In Birmingham alone 500 varieties of hammers are produced, and not only is each adapted to one particular proc- ess, but several varieties often serve exclusively for the different operations in one and the same process. So in Thucydides, 1. A sells wine worth £40 to B, 1 "The idea of profits being paid by the consumers, is, assuredly, very absurd. II., pp. or 2 a. c, vol. He has a fellow- feeling for his own Adam, and his education gradually enables him to smile at the rage for asceticism, as a mere prejudice of the old-fashioned miser. 20. This is owing to the fact, first, that the cap- ital which is exchanged for labour-power is itself but a portion of the product of others' labour appropriated without an equivalent; and, secondly, that this capital must not only be replaced by its producer, but replaced together with an added surplus. 42. or 50 x 6 V working-hours. PRODUCTIVITY OF LABOUR. The second period from 1815 to 1863 counts, during its 48 years, only 20 years of re- vival and prosperity against 28 of depression and stagnation. 114, n. there are other sources of accident which did not exist twenty years since; one especially, viz., the increased speed of the machinery. Of the six small masters, one would therefore squeeze out more than the average rate of surplus-value, another less. The other part of the constant capital, raw material and auxiliary substances, is constantly reproduced in less than a year; those produced by agriculture, for the most part annually. In it the actual horse-power of the modern steam engines and water-wheels appears in place of the nominal. Thus the linen acquires a value-form different from its physical form. 2 "Of all the instruments of the farmers' trade, the labour of man ... Since the value of the means of production is twelve shillings, 14-p-of these articles mere- ly replace the constant capital advanced. 60-61, says, "The decrease of villenage seems necessarily to have been the era of the origin of the poor. A rise or a fall in the prices of a number of leading articles, is sufficient in the one case to increase in the other to diminish, the sum of the prices of all commodities, and, therefore, to put more or less money in circulation. Total weekly, 340 minutes. Whether he shall find house-room on the land which he contributes to till, whether the house-room which he gets shall be human or swinish, whether he shall have the little space of garden that so vastly lessens the pressure of his poverty— all this does not depend on his willingness and ability to pay rea- sonable rent for the decent accommodation he requires, but de- pends on the use which others may see fit to make of their 'right to do as they will with their own.' However large may be a farm, there is no law that a certain proportion of labourers' dwellings (much less of decent dwellings) shall be upon it; nor does any law reserve for the labourer ever so little right in that soil to which his industry is as needful as sun and rain .... The rate of surplus- value remaining the same or even falling, so long as it only falls more slowly, than the productive power of labour rises, the mass of the surplus-product increases. Nassau W. As a matter of fact, the methods of primitive accumulation are anything but idyllic. We know that, with transitory exceptions, a change in the productiveness of labour does not cause any change in the value of labour-power, nor consequently in the magnitude of surplus- value, unless the products of the industries affected are articles habitually consumed by the labourers. Both these economic factors bring about, in the compound ratio of the impulses they reciprocally give one another, that change in the technical composition of capital by which the variable constituent becomes always smaller and smaller as compared with the constant. 1 It is, in the first place, quite clear that a change in the value of gold does not, in any way, affect its function as a standard of price. Its fall and the vic- tory of the proletariat are equally inevitable... This ratio, in its turn, varies considerably with the extent to which machinery has already seized on, or is then seizing on, those trades. 109.) 3 See amongst others, John Houghton: "Husbandry and Trade Im- proved." London, 1727. Young, in his "Political Arithmetic," Lond. If we reverse the process, we cannot comprehend either the one or the other. c , pp 19-23 passim.) 2 "Each handicraftsman being .. "The object of improved machinery is to diminish manual labour, to provide for the performance of a process or the completion of a link in a manufacture by the aid of an iron instead of the human apparatus." 2 "The adaptation of power to ma- chinery heretofore moved by hand, is almost of daily occurrence. . In England, perhaps, the labourer has not 2 /.." ("The Advantages of the East India Trade, &c," p. This change in piece-wage, so far 1 "A Defence of the Landowners and Farmers of Great Britain," 1814, PP 4, 5. Thiers: De la propriete. John Stuart Mill, with his usual eclectic logic, understands how to hold at the same time the view of his father, James Mill, and the opposite view. The labouring population therefore produces, along with the accumulation of capital produced by it, the means by which itself is made relatively superfluous, is turned into a relative sur- plus-population; and it does this to an always increasing extent. He lived there, because it was a tenantable cot," and because he wanted to have a cot for himself alone, anywhere, at any price, and in any conditions. They favoured artificially, therefore, the cultivation of corn. m. Here we find, amongst others, the following edifying passage: "Under the present law, no mill in which persons under 18 years of age are employed, ... Later on they part company and even become deadly foes. SANITARY AND EDUCATIONAL CLAUSES OF THE SAME. 1, ch. 62 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION We perceive, at first sight, the deficiencies of the elementary form of value: it is a mere germ, which must undergo a series of metamorphoses before it can ripen into the price-form. We now see that a certain minimum amount is a necessary condition for the conversion of numerous isolated and independent processes into one combined social process. Hence a sale leads to many purchases of various arti- 1 As before remarked, the actual producer of gold or silver forms an exception. The truth being, that when a commodity acts as equivalent, no quantitative determi- nation of its value is expressed. c, p. l In spite of the smaller number of its cultivators, the soil brought forth as much or more produce, after as before, because the revo- lution in the conditions of landed property was accompanied by improved methods of culture, greater co-operation, concentra- tion of the means of production, &c, and because not only were the agricultural wage-labourers put on the strain more intensely, 2 but the field of production on which they worked for themselves, became more and more contracted. The landowners turned out the sheep as they once turned out the men from their estates, and welcomed the new tenants — the wild beasts and the feathered birds.... The fiasco was, of course, as complete as that of Sir Robert Peel's Bank Act. But the Saviours of Society would not 1 Reports, &c, for 30th April, 1849, pp. Since the metamorphosis of commodities, or the development of their value-form, appears here under a new aspect, money also acquires a fresh function; it becomes the means of payment. The Act of 1850 was therefore finally completed in 1853 by forbidding the "employment of children in the morn- ing before and in the evening after young persons and women." Henceforth with a few exceptions the Factory Act of 1850 regu- lated the working-day of all workers in the branches of industry that come under it. It supplies him, for instance, with stones for throwing, grinding, pressing, cutting, &c. Is it worth while to keep the machinery (he means the living labour machines) in order, and is it not the greatest folly to think of parting with that? As the value of labour is only an irrational expression for the value of labour-power, it follows, of course, that the value of la- bour must always be less than the value it produces, for the capi- talist always makes labour-power work longer than is necessary for the reproduction of its own value. 2 Report of 1864 disclosed the deficiency of fat-forming food among a large part of the working-class, a certain Dr. Harvey (not, however, the celebrat- ed discoverer of the circulation of the blood), made a good thing by adver- tising recipes for reducing the superfluous fat of the bourgeoisie and aris- tocracy. This purely symbolic character is to a certain extent masked in metal tokens. The value of the means of production remaining the same, the value of each ar- ticle will fall to ninepence, made up of sixpence for the value of the means of production and threepence for the value newly added by the labour. c, p. At the starting-point it is not a use-value to its owner; at the finishing point it is. c, p. And it is clear as noon-day, that machines and systems of machinery, the characteristic instruments of labour of Modern Industry, are incomparably more loaded with value than the implements used in handicrafts and manufactures. DIVISION OP LABOUR AND MANUFACTURE 337 By degrees, it becomes the splitting up of carriage-making int© its various detail processes, each of which crystallises into the ex- clusive function of a particular workman, the manufacture, as a whole, being carried on by the men in conjunction. 2 1 Tuckett is aware that the modern woollen industry has sprung, with the introduction of machinery, from manufacture proper and from the destruc- tion of rural and domestic industries. The category, surplus labour-time, does not exist at all for him, since it is included in the normal working-day, which he thinks he has paid for in the day's wages. 2 I must here remind the reader that the categories, "variable and con- stant capital," were first used by me. It must be remarked further, that if in the prisons it is necessary to set down in the account the expenses of administration and surveil- lance, on the other hand, the prisoners have not to pay for their lodging; that the purchases they make at the canteens are not in- cluded in the expenses of maintenance, and that these expenses are greatly lowered in consequence of the large number of per- sons that make up the establishments, and of contracting for or buying wholesale, the food and other things that enter into their consumption. His favourites received contracts under conditions whereby they, cleverer than 1 William Howitt: "Colonisation and Christianity: A Popular History of the Treatment of the Natives by the Europeans in all their Colonies." London, 1838, p. . c, p. 139.) 2 "The inextinguishable passion for gain, the auri sacra fames, will always lead capitalists." (MacCulloch: "The Principles of Polit. It converts the labourer into a crippled monstrosity, by forc- ing his detail dexterity at the expense of a world of productive capabilities and instincts; just as in the States of La Plata they butcher a whole beast for the sake of his hide or his tallow. It is not merely that an accelerated accumulation of total capital, accelerated in a constantly growing progression, is needed to absorb an additional number of labourers, or even, on account of the constant metamorphosis of old capital, to keep employed those already functioning. Nineteen weeks of enforced idleness had brought them to this pass, and while the mother told the history of that bitter past, she moaned as if all her faith in a future that should atone for it were dead. 1 The Act of 1850 changed the 15 hours' time from 6 a. Scotland is therefore the last refuge of the "noble passion." "In the Highlands," says Somers in 1848, "new forests are springing up like mushrooms. We should have G=(0+v) = v or C the expanded capital =v+s and therefore C— G = s as before. In cloths of other descriptions, as much as 50 per cent, size is sometimes added; so that a manufacturer may, and does truly boast, that he is getting rich by selling cloth for less money per pound than he paid for the mere yarn of which they are composed." 2 But the workpeople had to suffer, not only from the experiments of the manufacturers inside the mills, and of the municipalities outside, not only from reduced wages and absence of work, from want and from charity, and from the eulogistic speeches of lords and commons. We overlook the facts that gold, when a mere commodity, is not money, and that when other commodities express their prices in gold, this gold is but the money-form of those commodities themselves. Therefore her depopulation must go yet further, that thus she may fulfil her true destiny, that of an English sheep-walk and cattle-pasture. The different spheres of production, it is true, con- stantly tend to an equilibrium: for, on the one hand, while each an enormous number and variety of industries contribute to the satisfaction of the wants of an ordinary labourer, is copied almost word for word from B. d. The price of the yarn is 12-^- d. 281: "The former may have gained what the other has lost." 3 "The man of knowledge and the productive labourer come to be widely divided from each other, and knowledge, instead of remaining the handmaid of labour in the hand of the labourer to increase his productive pow- ers ... of such children, from 8 to 13, as had been employed before noon. "They are so ill fed that assuredly among them there must be many cases of severe and injurious privation." 3 ("Pri- vation" of the capitalist all this! i.e., "abstinence" from paying for the means of subsistence absolutely necessary for the mere vegetation of his "hands.") The following table shows the conditions of nourishment of the above-named categories of purely town-dwelling workpeople, as compared with the minimum assumed by Dr. Smith, and with the food-allowance of the cotton operatives during the time of their greatest distress: Both ^exes Average weekly carbon Average weekly nitrogen Five in-door occupations Unemployed Lancashire Operatives Minimum quantity to be allowed to the* Lanca- shire Operatives, equal number oi' males and fe- males 28,87b grains 28,211 " 28,600 1,192 grains 1,295 " 1,330 1 "Public Health. This same Tory, moreover, admits that "Acts of Parliament regulating wages, but against the labourer and in favour of the master, lasted for the long period of 464 years. 2 How is that value- determined? But an increase in the variable component of the capital employed necessitates an increase in its constant component, too, in the workshops, implements, &c, and, in partic- ular, in the raw material, the call for which grows quicker than the number of workmen. "The dispossessed ten- ants either seek a subsistence in the neighbouring towns," &c. Rep.," p. 76, n. 1 M — M', money which begets money, such is the description of Capital from the mouths of its first interpreters, the Mercantilists. Hence, even when prices, rapidity of currency, and the extent of the economy in payments, are given, the quantity of money current and the mass of commodities circulating during a given period, such as a day, no longer correspond. The values of the means of production, i.e., the cotton and the spindle, which values are expressed in the price of twelve shil- lings, are therefore constituent parts of the value of the yarn, or, in other words, of the value of the product. One of the great London branches of industry involved in the catastrophe was iron shipbuilding. . Hence, that formula of the economists, referred to in Chapter XVIII., which represents wages as a share in the product itself. L. 96.) 1 Population of Ireland, 1801, 5,319,867 persons; 1811, 6,084,996; 1821, 6,869,544; 1831, 7,828,347; 1841, 8,222,664. 3 "Merchant Farms." "An Enquiry into the Causes of the Present High Price of Provisions." London, 1767, p. 2 "Productive consumption ... of Insp. d. "The lodging which is obtained by the pitmen and other labourers connected with the collieries of North- umberland and Durham," says Dr. Julian Hunter, "is perhaps, on the whole, the worst and the dearest of which any large spe- cimens can be found in England, the similar parishes of Mon- mouthshire excepted. In addition, it falls a prey to the destructive influence of natural forces. 2 He himself, ten years later, cites his opinion of 1845 in proof of how much he under-estimat- ed in that year the elasticity of machinery, and of man's labour- power, both of which are simultaneously stretched to an extreme by the compulsory shortening of the working-day. 3 A. The owners of commodities therefore find out, that the same division of labour that turns them into independent private producers, * Tn his letter of November 28, 1878, to N. would eventually fall— whether on landlord, or lessee, or labourer, or public. Now, since in equal periods he produces equal val- ues, the produce of the last hour but one, must have the same value as that of the last hour. c, vol. Its immediate effect on the workpeople is like that of all machinery, which, since the rise of modern industry, has seized upon new branches of trade. The Catholic church was, at the time of the Reforma- tion, feudal proprietor of a great part of the English land. In proportion as the new farms arose, not only were no new cottages built: old ones were demolished, and the supply of la- bour had to come from open villages, miles away, by long roads that wound along the sides of the hills. The wear and tear of a machine is not exactly proportional to its working-time. But machinery not only acts as a competitor who gets the better of the workman, and is constantly on the point of making him superfluous. In two weeks he incorporates twice as much labour, and therefore twice as much value, as in one week, and during the same time he consumes twice as much material, and wears out twice as much machinery, of double the value in each case; he therefore preserves, in the product of two weeks, twice as much value as in the product of one week. ("Report of Insp. 135.) To be sure, the matter looks quite different if we consider capitalist production in the uninterrupted flow of its renewal, and if, in place of the individual capitalist and the individual worker, we view them in their totality, the capitalist class and the working-class confronting each other. . The factory system was therefore raised, in the natural course of things, on an inadequate foundation. All the usual arguments against the shortening of the working- day, assume that it takes place under the conditions we have here supposed to exist; but in reality the very contrary is the case: a change in the productiveness and intensity of labour either precedes, or immediately follows, a shortening of the working-day. The value of labour-power thus determines the value of labour, or, ex- pressed in money, its necessary price. In the 14 sleeping rooms, 34 adults and 33 children. The cure will not be perfect, till our manufacturing poor are contented to labour six days for the same sum which they now earn in four days." 3 To this end, and for "extirpating idleness, debauchery and excess," promoting a spirit of industry, "lowering the price of labour in our manufactories, and easing the lands of the heavy burden of poor's rates," our "faithful Eckart" of capital proposes this approved device: to shut up such labourers as become dependent on public support, in a word, paupers, in "an ideal workhouse." Such ideal workhouse must be made a "House of Terror," and not an asylum for the poor, "where they are to be plentifully fed, warmly and decently clothed, and where they do but little work." 4 In this "House of Terror," this "ideal workhouse, the poor shall work 14 hours in a day, al- 1 "An Essay," &c. In pro- portion therefore as commodities in general acquire their true prices, in proportion as their values become estimated according to the fallen value of the precious metal, in the same proportion the quantity of that metal necessary for realising those new prices is provided beforehand. The development of the productive power of labour reacts also on the original capital already engaged in the process of production. An example. 67.) 2 "In whatever proportion the expenses of a labourer are diminished, in the same proportion will his wages be diminished, if the restraints upon industry are at the same time taken off." ("Considerations Concerning Taking 320 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION The value of a commodity is, in itself, of no interest to the cap- italist. The money wage rose, but not in proportion to the depreciation of money and the correspond- ing rise in the prices of commodities. Land grabbing on a great scale, such as was perpetrated in England, is the first step in creating a field for the establishment of agriculture on a great scale. Increased produc- tiveness of labour also, it is true, will supply more products in a given working-day. In the 8 years from 1853 to 1861 it had increased from the basis taken in 1853 by 20 per cent.! The fact is so astonishing as to be almost incredible. They declare with one voice before the jury that ten or twelve years before, their labour only lasted eight hours a-day. At any 1 At this moment, March, 1867, the Indian and Chinese market is again overstocked by the consignments of the British cotton manufacturers. But where a particular rate of piece-wage has for a long time been fixed by tradition, and its lowering, therefore, presented especial difficulties, the masters, in such exceptional cases, sometimes had recourse to its compulsory transformation into time-wages. One Eskrigge, cotton-spinner, of the firm of Kershaw, Leese, & Co., had laid before the Factory Inspector of his district the scheme of a re- lay system intended for his mill. Hence, what the capitalist sets the labourer to pro- duce, is a particular use-value, a specified article. Princ. xvi., p. But it costs less labour to build one workshop for twenty persons than to build ten to accommodate two weavers each; thus the value of the means of production that are concentrated for use in common on a large scale does not increase in direct proportion to the expan- sion and to the increased useful effect of those means. "Very natural it is that they should do so.... 566 CHAPTER XXIII SIMPLE REPRODUCTION Whatever the form of the process of production in a society, it must be a continuous process, must continue to go periodically through the same phases. So far as accumulation takes place, the capitalist must have succeeded in selling his commodities, and in reconverting the sale- money into capital. It forms a disposable industrial reserve army, that belongs to capital quite as absolutely as if the latter had bred it at its own cost. Each pound of the cotton bought at six- pence, and worked up after the rise in value, transfers to the product a value of one shilling; and the cotton already spun before the rise, and perhaps circulating in the market as yarn, likewise transfers to the product twice its original value. The use-value of the money-commodity becomes two-fold. We let pass such extraordinary notions as are of no importance for our purpose; for instance, the assertion, that manufac- turers reckon as part of their profit, gross or net, the amount required to make good wear and tear of machinery, or in other words, to replace a part of the capital. c, J. Hence, instead of 10 hours, the labourer need now work only 7-p- hours, in order to reproduce this value. A, who sells wine and buys corn, possibly produces more wine, with given labour-time, than farmer B could, and B, on the other hand, more corn than wine-grower A could. and 6 p. Each of them, so far as it is exchange-value, must therefore be reducible to this third. . It is known by experience how long on the average a machine of a particular kind will last. Petty, who regarded the population as the basis of wealth, and was, like Adam Smith, an outspoken foe to parsons, says, as if he had a presenti- ment of their bungling interference, "that Religion best nourishes when the Priests are most mortified, as was before said of the Law, which best flour- isheth when lawyers have least to do." He advises the Protestant priests, there- fore, if they, once for all, will not follow the Apostle Paul and "mortify" them- selves by celibacy, "not to breed more Churchmen than the Benefices, as they now stand shared out, will receive, that is to say, if there be places for about twelve thousand in England and Wales, it will not be safe to breed up 24,000 ministers, for then the twelve thousand which are unprovided for, will seek ways how to get themselves a livelihood, which they cannot do more easily than by persuading the people that the twelve thousand incumbents do poison or starve their souls, and misguide them in their way to Heaven." (Petty; : 'A Treatise of Taxes and Contributions," London, 16G7, u 57.) Adam Smith's position with the Protestant priesthood of his time is shown by the following. c. But, with- out labourers, their capital must have perished, or, at least, must soon have been diminished to that small amount which each individual could employ with his own hands. 37.) 8 One example. THE WORKING-DAY 271 English Labour Statutes from the 14th century to well into the middle of the 18th. c, pp. m. 8.) THE WORKING-DAY 299 tries, such as nail-making, 1 had long since fallen as completely under capitalist exploitation as the factories themselves. The lie was exposed by the THE WORKING-DAY 297 were placed under special Acts, by which, in the former, the la- bour of young persons and women during the night-time (from 8 in the evening to 6 in the morning), and in the latter, the employ- ment of journeymen bakers under 18, between 9 in the evening and 5 in the morning were forbidden. Apart from violent conflicts as to the rate of wages (and Adam Smith has already shown that in such a conflict, taken on the whole, the master is always master), a rise in the price of labour resulting from accumulation of capi- tal implies the following alternative: Either the price of labour keeps on rising, because its rise does not interfere with the progress of accumulation. Added to this is the injurious effect of drains, privies, decomposing substances, and other filth usual in the purlieus of the smaller cottages." With regard to space: "In one lace-school 18 girls and a mistress, 35 cubic feet to each person; in another, where the smell \ was unbearable, 18 persons and 24y cubic feet per head. recent inquiry has discovered that even there, in districts once famous for fine men and gallant soldiers, the inhabi- tants have degenerated into a meagre and stunted race. The analogy appears most indisputable where there is an invisible bond uniting the various branches of trade. And to this day it constantly serves as such a starting-point, whenever a handicraft, or a manufacture, is turned into an industry carried on by 'machinery. But further, apart from the class of lazy annuitants thus created, and from the improvised wealth of the financiers, middlemen between the government and the na- tion — as also apart from the tax-farmers, merchants, private manufacturers, to whom a good part of every national loan renders the service of a capital fallen from heaven— the national debt has given rise to joint-stock companies, to dealings in negotiable effects of all kinds, and to agiotage, in a word to stock-exchange gambling and the modern bankocracy. It is only because his»moncy constant- ly functions as capital that the economic guise of a capitalist at- taches to a man. m. For the second arrest for vagabondage the whipping is to be repeated and half the ear sliced off; but for LEGISLATION AGAINST THE EXPROPRIATED 735 the third relapse the offender is to be executed as a hardened criminal and enemy of the common weal. Wages is a category that, as yet, has no existence at the present stage of our investigation. By means, therefore, of the value-relation expressed in our equation, the bodily form of commodity B becomes the value- form of commodity A, or the body of commodity B acts as a mirror to the value of commodity A. . His erroneous dogma: "An unfa- vourable balance of trade never arises but from a redundant currency.... 231: "Les nations pauvres, c'est la ou le peuple est a son aise; et les nations riches, c'est la ou il est ordinairoment pauvre." THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 649 under the income tax, furnishes the surest basis. Iron rusts and wood rots. The general form of relative value has resumed its original shape of simple or isolated relative value. Slept on the floor of the furnace, over head, with an apron under me, and a bit of a jacket over me. A working-man's living and prospects depend so much upon his fingers, that any loss of them is a very serious matter to him. — The "hopelessly bewildering tangle of contradictory enactments" (S. 5d. 2.) 2 Niebuhr in his "Roman History" says very naively: "It is evident that works like the Etruscan, which in their ruins astound us, pre-suppose in little (!) states lords and vassals." Sismondi says far more to the purpose that "Brussels lace" pre-supposes wage-lords and wage-slaves. He was so before he became buyer; he had already lost 10% in selling before he gained 10% as buyer. Hence in antiquity over-work becomes horrible only when the object is to obtain exchange-value in its specific independent money-form; in the production of gold and silver. THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 637 England. But they are also use- values differing in their qualities, as, for example, corn and clothes. (Repts., &c, for April 30th, 1863, p. The fact that the work- man, when the productiveness of his labour has been increased, off the Bounty on Corn Exported," &c, Lond., 1753, p. So here: "The capital itself in the long run becomes entirely wages, and when replaced by the sale of produce becomes wages again." CONVERSION OP SURPLUS-VALUE INTO CAPITAL 591 bearings of the facts. — Every week this same paper has, under the sensational headings, "Fearful and fatal accidents," 254 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION In the last week of June, 1863, all the London daily papers published a paragraph with the "sensational" heading, "Death from simple over-work." It dealt with the death of the milli- ner, Mary Anne Walkley, 20 years of age, employed in a highly- respectable dressmaking establishment, exploited by a lady with the pleasant name of Elise. We shall, therefore, in the first place, have to consider the labour-process independently of the particular form it assumes under given social conditions. In a wider sense we may include among the instruments of labour, in addition to those things that are used for directly transferring labour to its subject, and which therefore, in one way or another, serve as conductors of activity, all such objects as are necessary for carrying on the labour-process. c, p. 2 T. James I. II., pp. Both the process and its result, appear to be owing to this value. Diamonds are of very rare occurrence on the earth's surface, and hence their discovery costs, on an average, a great deal of labour-time. It would be useless to repeat here, with regard to the phenomenal form, what has been already worked out in the substantial form. Light assists in the elaboration of good plastic blood, and hardens the fibre alter it has been laid down. Hence it is that a dozen persons working together will, in their collective working-day of 144 hours, produce far more than twelve isolated men each working 12 hours, or than one man who works twelve days in succession. 68, n. So, too, the economic categories, already discussed by us, bear the stamp of history. These commodities must then be thrown into circulation. The illusion begotten by the intervention of money vanishes immediately, if, instead of taking a single capitalist and a single labourer, we take the class of capi- talists and the class of labourers as a whole. "Factory education is compulsory, and it is a condition of labour." ("Rep. Here, as in natural science, is shown the correctness of the law discovered by Hegel (in his "Logic"), that merely quantitative differences beyond a certain point pass into qualitative changes. The real facts, which are travestied by the optimism of econ- omists, are as follows: The labourers, when driven out of the workshop by the machinery, are thrown upon the labour-market, and there add to the number of workmen at the disposal of the capitalists. It did not, therefore, affect children who could always be employed for half an hour before and 2 — hours after this period, provided the whole of their labour did 1 not exceed 6-^- hours. If, e.g., the daily value of labour- power is 3 shillings, the value of the product of 6 working-hours, and if the working-day is 12 hours, the price of 1 working-hour is j^ shillings =3d. In Dublin, the master bakers have of- fered the most determined opposition to the movement, and by dis- countenancing as much as possible the journeymen promoting it, have succeeded in leading the men into acquiescence in Sun- day work and night-work, contrary to the convictions of the men." 1 The Committee of the English Government, which Govern- ment, in Ireland, is armed to the teeth, and generally knows how to show it, remonstrates in mild, though funeral, tones with the implacable master bakers of Dublin, Limerick, Cork, &c. The second and concluding metamorphosis of a commodity Because money is the metamorphosed shape of all other com- modities, the result of their general alienation, for this reason it is alienable itself without restriction or condition. Final- ly, we have considered this question entirely apart from the fact, that everywhere, except in the metal industries, young persons (under 18), and women and children form the preponderating ele- ment in the class of factory hands. Econ." Andover and New York, lfc35, p. At the same time, it thereby also revolu- tionises the division of labour within the society, and incessantly launches masses of capital and of workpeople from one branch of production to another. 94 CHAPTER III MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OF COMMODITIES SECTION 1.— THE MEASURE OF VALUES Throughout this work, I assume, for the sake of simplicity, gold as the money-commodity. A use-value, or useful article, therefore, has value only because human labour in the abstract has been embodied or materialised in it. On the whole, the labourer and his means of production remained closely united, like the snail with its shell, and thus there was wanting the principal basis of manufacture, the separation of the labourer from his means of production, and the conversion of these means into capital. 23. 2 It did not, however, prevent them, during 10 years, from spinning silk 10 hours a day out of the blood of lit- tle children who had to be placed upon stools for the performance of their work. VII. Children and young persons are at present worse treated, and harder worked than at any previous period (n. 3 From the reports of the last Parliamentary Commission on adulter- ation of means of subsistence, it will be seen that the adulteration even of medicines is the rule, not the exception in England. 2 But on this apparently decisive victory of capital, followed at once a revulsion. * 1. 6d., still this lower price would represent an increased mass of necessaries. If such an instrument has no value to lose, if, in other words, it is not the product of human labour, it transfers no value to the product. pp. That part of the tribute exacted by him which he accumulates, is said to be saved 1 In his description of the process of reproduction, and of accumula- tion, Adam Smith, in many ways, not only made no advance, but even lost considerable ground, compared with his predecessors, especially by the Phys- iocrats. 1 "Les economistes ont une singuliere maniere de proc6der. The categories of bourgeois economy consist of such like forms. 2 Given the length of the working-day, all other circumstances remaining the same, the exploitation of double the number of workmen demands, not only a doubling of that part of constant capital which is invested in machinery and buildings, but also of that part which is laid out in raw material and auxiliary sub- stances. 3 The English factory workers were the champions, not only of the English, but of the modern working-class generally, as their theorists were the first to throw down the gauntlet to the theory of capital. Within the limits of what is strictly necessary, the individual consump- tion of the working-class is, therefore, the reconversion of the means of subsistence given by capital in exchange for labour-power, into fresh labour-power at the disposal of capital for exploitation. Their number fell from 288,277 in 1851, to 204,962 in 1861. Hence, in answer to Proudhon's phrase; "Le travail est dit valoir, non pas en tant que marchandise lui-meme, mais en vue des valeurs qu'on suppose renfermees puissancielle- ment en lui. The private property of the labourer in his means of production is the foundation of petty industry, whether agricultural, manufacturing, or both; petty industry, again, is an essential condition for the development of social production and of the free individuality of the labourer himself. that we can take in hand these modified forms of surplus- value. Nevertheless, they work in the last week of each month until 10, 11, 12, or 1 o'clock at night, along with the older labourers, in a very mixed company. Rep. "The speed of the spindles has increased upon throstles 500, and upon mules 1,000 revolutions a minute, i.e., the speed of the throstle spindle, which in 1839 was 4,500 times a minute, Is now (1862) 5,000; and of the mule spindle, that was 5,000, is now 6,000 times a minute, amounting in the former case to one- tenth, and in the second case to one-fifth additional increase. English and French legislation run parallel and are identical in purport. as soon as the working-day rises to 12 hours, to 2yd. But it will yield, during equal periods of time, dif- ferent quantities of values in use; more, if the productive power rise, fewer, if it fall. . * SECTION 2.— THE REPRESENTATION OF THE COMPONENTS OF THE VALUE OF THE PRODUCT BY CORRESPONDING PROPORTIONAL PARTS OF THE PRODUCT ITSELF Let us now return to the example by which we were shown how the capitalist converts money into capital. produced food for a swarming non-agricultural popu- lation, and this food, belonging to the monarch and the priesthood, afforded the means of erecting the mighty monuments which filled the land.... The function of gold as coin becomes completely independent of the metallic value of that gold. a week (this belongs to the parents) and '2d. 44. . WEEKLY AMOUNT OF NUTRIMENT Quantity of Nitrogen- ous Ingre- dients Quantity of Non-Nitro- genous In- gredients Quantity of Mineral Matter Total Portland (convict) . Overthrow of Co-operation based on Handicraft and on the Division of Labour We have seen how machinery does away with co-operation based on handicrafts, and with manufacture based on the divi- sion of handicraft labour. "Suppose," says H. Baker, the Inspector of Factories, says, "I have myself had lately to direct prosecutions against one cotton mill occupier for having in these pinching 426 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION its list of the killed and wounded in the industrial battle. The factory system carries the social division of la- bour immeasurably further than does manufacture, for it in- creases the productiveness of the industries it seizes upon, in a far higher degree. c, 194, p. 446 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION "navvies," more or less permanently employed, and the whole administrative and commercial staff, make up about 28,000. 18.4 I Rye, . This sphere that we are deserting, within whose boundaries the sale and purchase of labour-power goes on, is in fact a very Eden of the innate rights of man. of yarn out of air, or, as if he had spun them with the aid of cotton and spindles, that, being the spontaneous gift of Nature, transferred no value to the product. . So long as the seller sticks fast to his money, which is the transformed shape of his commodity, that commodity is still in the first phase of its metamorphosis, and has completed only half its course. The 6,000 acres had until this time lain waste, and brought in no income to their owners. The cheapened commodity, of course, causes only a pro tanto fall in the value of labour-power, a fall proportional to the extent of that commodity's employment in the reproduction of labour- power. . Their wonderful development from 1853 to 1860, hand-in-hand with the physical and moral regeneration of the factory workers, struck the most purblind. 1 10 " North Street, No. 18 . This is because the technical foun- dation of the factory system, namely, the substitution of ma- chines for muscular power, and the light character of the labour, is almost entirely absent in Manufacture, and at the same time women and over-young children are subjected, in a most uncon- scionable way, to the influence of poisonous or injurious sub- stances. . Incorrigible and dangerous rogues are to be branded with an R on the left shoulder and set to hard labour, and if they are caught begging again, to be executed without mercy. 454.) "You are then," concludes the bourgeois, "against educa- tion?" "Most certainly not; but," &c. 1 Each individual commodity, in this connexion, is to be considered as an average sample of its class. II., p. c.) "Capital ... 4 "Rep. If men were willing, at a blow, to turn all the soil from pub- lic into private property, they would destroy certainly the root of the evil, but also — the colonies. 2 If we confine our attention to some particular lot of raw mate- rials, of rags, for instance, in paper manufacture, or of wire in nee- dle manufacture, we perceive that it passes in succession through a series of stages in the hands of the various detail workmen until completion. In a certain tile-field at Mosley, e.g., a young woman, 24 years of age, was in the habit of making 2,000 tiles a day, with the assistance of 2 little girls, who carried the clay for her, and stacked the tiles. 4 "The present law (of 1850) was a compromise whereby the employed surrendered the benefit of the Ten Hours' Act for the advantage of one uni- form period for the commencement and termination of the labour of those whose labour is restricted." (Reports, &.C., for 30th April, 1852, p. Every large town may be looked upon as a place of human sacrifice, a shrine where thousands pass yearly' through the fire as offerings to the moloch of avarice." S. Comm., V. In the east of England thrives a beautiful fruit of this vicious circle — the so-called gang-system, to which I must briefly return here. In this process the labour-power is it- self consumed by the capitalist while the means of production are consumed by the labour-power in the exercise of its function, la- bour. 2 The second essential condition to the owner of money finding labour-power in the market as a commodity is this— that the labourer instead of being in the position to sell commodities in 1 In encyclopaedias of classical antiquities we find such nonsense as this — that in the ancient world capital was fully developed, "except that the free labourer and a system of credit was wanting." Mommsen also, in his "History of Rome," commits, in this respect, one blunder after another. 2 This is what took place in the Roumanian provinces. The time during which the labourer works, is the time during which the capitalist consumes the labour-power he has purchased of him. If there were no divi- sion of employments, there would be no buying or selling, but there would still be profit." For Mill then, exchange, buying and selling, those general conditions of capitalist production, are but an incident, and there would always be profits even with- out the purchase and sale of labour-power! "If," he continues, "the labourers of the country collectively produce twenty per cent, more than their wages, profits will be twenty per cent., whatever prices may or may -not be." This is, on the one hand, a rare bit of tautology; for if labourers produce a surplus-value of 20% for the capitalist, his profit will be to the ABSOLUTE AND RELATIVE SURPLUS-VALUE 517 total wages of the labourers as 20 : 100. CAPITALIST PRODUCTION It is true that in some cases, as we saw from instances of English worsted and silk factories, an extraordinary extension of the factory system may, at a certain stage of its develop- ment, be accompanied not only by a relative, but by an absolute decrease in the number of operatives employed. (Quelle hprreur!) ... And consequently the owners of commodities are distinguishable only as sellers, those who own commodities, and buyers, those who own money. With the possibility of holding and storing up exchange-value in the shape of a particular commodity, arises also the greed for gold. Nevertheless, for the better compre- hension of the production of relative surplus-value, we may add the following remarks, in which we assume nothing more than the re- sults we have already obtained. 3 At the end of the 18th and during the first ten years of the 19th century, the English farmers and landlords enforced the absolute minimum of wage, by paying the agricultural labour- ers less than the minimum in the form of wages, and the remainder in the shape of parochial relief. To say that these two independ- ent and antithetical acts have an intrinsic unity, are essentially one, is the same as to say that this intrinsic oneness expresses itself in an external antithesis. 2 coats. They want transforming into capital. But the same circum- stances which allow the capitalist in the long run to prolong the working-day, also allow him first, and compel him finally, to nomi- nally lower the price of labour, until the total price of the increased number of hours is lowered, and, therefore, the daily or week- ly wage. So was it also with the corvee, e.g., in the Danubian Prin- cipalities (now Roumania). of Fact, for 31st October, 1862," p. You gain just as much as you lose. Naylor & Vickers, on the other hand, in conformity with the interest of their busi- ness, considered that periodically changed night-labour might possibly do more harm than continual night-labour.) We find the men who do it, as well as the others who do other work only by day Our objections to not allowing boys under [ 18 to work at night, would be on account of the increase of ex- pense, but this is the only reason. 2 Gf. F. The purchaser has the commodity, the seller has the money, i.e., a commodity ready to go into circulation at any time. For the six weeks ending May 2nd this year~(1862), the average was higher— 8 days or 84 hours a week." Still this same Mr. Smith, who is so extremely devoted to the pluralis majestatis, adds with a smile, "Machine- work is not great." So the employers in the block-printing say: "Hand labour is more healthy than machine-work." On the whole, manufacturers declare with indignation against the 1 This is not to be taken in the same sense as our surplus-labour time. c, p. Although, therefore, it is clear at the first glance that, by incorporating both stupendous physical forces, and the natural sciences, with the process of production, Modern Industry raises the productiveness of labour to an extraor- dinary degree, it is by no means equally clear, that this increased productive force is not, on the other hand, purchased by an increased expenditure of labour. the capitalist is then the owner not of the capital only" (he means the means of production) "but of the labour also. In consequence there arose local fam- ines, the defective means of communication not permitting the failure of rice in one district to be compensated by importation from another 2 Thus the fabrication of shuttles formed, as early as the 17th century, a special branch of industry in Holland. 1 What strikes us, then, in the English legislation of 1867, is, on the one hand, the necessity imposed on the parliament of the ruling classes, of adopting in principle measures so extraor- dinary, and on so great a scale, against the excesses of capital- istic exploitation; and on the other hand, the hesitation, the repugnance, and the bad faith, with which it lent itself to the task of carrying those measures into practice. "Is there anything that you are aware of to account for the necessity of feeding them very much better than ordinary la- bourers? In the summer we get a few potatoes, planting a small patch ourselves; and when they are done we get back to stirabout. to the increase of agricultural produce," 4 this dispropor- tion obtains much more for the last period, when a positive decrease of the agricultural population went hand in hand with increase of the area under cultivation, with more intensive cul- tivation, unheard-of accumulation of the capital incorporated with the soil, and devoted to its working, an augmentation in 1 The landed aristocracy advanced themselves to this end, of course per Parliament, funds from the State Treasury, at a very low rate of interest, which the farmers have to make good at a much higher rate. 2 "Que Tune de ces deux valeurs soit argent, ou qu'elles soient toutes deux marchandises usuelles, rien de plus indifferent en soi." ("Mercier de la Riviere," 1. 91.) 3 A boorishly clumsy form of this bondage exists in the county of Durham. All the value trans- ferred to those 4 lbs., from the raw material and instruments of labour consumed, was, so to say, intercepted in order to be incor- porated in the 16 lbs. The latter class comprises more than three-fourths of the total number of bakers, (p. At the same time, spinning and weaving are carried on in each family as subsidiary industries. They (the labourers) become almost the slaves of the tradesman, to whom they owe money." 1 In thy chapters on the "working-day" and "machinery," the reader has seen under what circumstances the British working- class created an "intoxicating augmentation of wealth and power" for the propertied classes. As a general rule, articles of utility become commodities, only because they are products of the labour of private individuals COMMODITIES 73 or groups of individuals who carry on their work independently of each other. In all, 14 days in the year. They have proposed that we shall erect a prison in the parish, and then give notice to the neighbourhood, that if any persons are disposed to farm the poor of this parish, they do give in sealed proposals, on a certain day, of the lowest price at which they will take them off our hands; and that they will be authorised to refuse to any one un- less he be shut up in the aforesaid prison. and 5s. This mass must, therefore, be capable of expansion and contrac- tion. The price of the yarn is fifteen shillings, and fifteen shil- lings were spent in the open market upon the constituent elements 1 These figures are quite arbitrary. Moreover, he could not employ his journeymen in many other handicrafts than the one in which qe was a master. We have its result without the intermediate stage, in the form M— M', "en style lapidaire" so to say, money that is worth more money, value that is greater than itself. The tempo- rary or local want of labour brings about no rise in wages, but a forcing of the women and children into the fields, and exploi- tation at an age constantly lowered. of this work, in the section on landed property. Even Adam Smith and Ricardo, the best representatives of the school, treat the form of value as a thing of no importance, as having no connexion with the inherent nature of commodities. 2 On the one hand, co-operation allows of the work being car- ried on over an extended space; it is consequently imperatively called for in certain undertakings, such as draining, constructing dykes, irrigation works, and the making of canals, roads and rail- ways. Great fluctuations in the amount of em- ployment, and great suffering: may become more frequent as capital itself becomes more plentiful." (Richard Jones, "An Introductory Lecture on Pol. THE LABOUR-PROCESS 185 capitalist to whom his labour belongs; the capitalist taking good care that the work is done in a proper manner, and that the means of production are used with intelligence, so that there is no unnecessary waste of raw material, and no wear and tear of the implements beyond what is necessarily caused by the work. And I have been informed of another, who, in order to keep with- out the law, but to attain the same object, charges the poor children who work for him a shilling each, as a fee for. In addition to a measure of its extension, i.e., duration, labour now acquires a measure of its intensity or of the degree of its con- densation or density. Bastiat, who imagines that the ancient Greeks and Romans lived by plunder alone. In its function of means of pay- ment, money realises subsequently the value or price of the arti- cle supplied— i.e., in this particular case, the value or price of the labour supplied. "Gold is a wonderful thing! Whoever possesses it is lord of all he wants. This was the origin of the additional Factory Act of June 7th, 1844. Thus the umbrella "assembles," first, 6% on the price of each of its elements, and a further 6% on its own total price. x But the brave Gaels must expiate yet more bitterly their idolatry, romantic and of the mountains, for the "great men" of the clan. This happened since 1604 under Charles X. 22.) THE CONCEPT OP RELATIVE SURPLUS-VALUE 315 erto in treating of surplus-value, arising from a simple prolonga- tion of the working-day, we have assumed the mode of production to be given and invariable. c.) Locke says, "The universal consent of mankind erave to silver, on account of its qualities which made it suitable for money, an imaginary value." Law, on the other hand, "How could different nations give an imaginary value to any single thing... In tanning, e.g., he deals with the skins as his simple ob- ject of labour. All must, forced by blows, work on until death puts an end to their sufferings and their distress." ("Diod. 66, n. As the contest takes place in the arena of modern industry, it first breaks out in the home of that indus- try — England. Each looks to himself only, and no one troubles himself about the rest, and just because they do so, do they all, in accordance with the pre- established harmony of things, or under the auspices of an all- shrewd providence, work together to their mutual advantage, for the common weal and in the interest of all. -VI. Definite quantities of product, these quantities being determined by ex- perience, now represent nothing but definite quantities of labour, definite masses of crystallised labour-time. 44, n. It is this spontaneously developed 1 "Division of labour proceeds from the separation of professions the most widely different to that division, where several labourers divide between them the preparation of one and the same product, as in manufacture. But could the labourer 1 "Mr. Ricardo, ingeniously enough, avoids a difficulty which, on a first view, threatens to encumber his doctrine, that value depends on the quantity of labour employed in production. Labour cannot emancipate it- self in the white skin where in the black it is branded. At the most it appears to do so, and that only approximately, in the handicraft-like beginnings of manufacture, l and in that kind of agriculture on a large scale, which corresponds to the epoch of manufacture, and is distinguished from peasant agriculture, mainly by the number of the labourers simultaneously employed, and by the mass of the means of production concentrated for their use. . Its analysis, therefore, is our real difficulty. On the other hand, "machinery can seldom be used with success to abridge the labour of an individual; more time would be lost in its construction than could be saved by its application. How completely in the meantime circum- stances had changed, is proved by an occurrence unheard-of before in the English Lower House. 224, n. i., p. Neither is it enough that they are compelled to sell it voluntarily. c), although in one case there certainly was "abuse of this system in respect to a number of girls and young women brought from the agricultural districts of Scotland into Lancashire and Cheshire." Under this system the manufacturer entered into a contract with the workhouse authorities for a certain period. 2 L. The value of a commodity, it is true, is determined by the quan- tity of labour contained in it, but this quantity is itself limited by social conditions. 2 Ure, I. Dr. Ballard gives it as the general opinion of the whole body of medical officers in London, that 300 cubic feet is the minimum space proper for each person in a bedroom or workroom. 284 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION the workers themselves, under the pretence that they had been taught by experience, were to help in the destruction of their own work. . That the workman moreover really does expend more labour-power, is ensured by the mode in which the capitalist pays him. this intoxicating augmentation of wealth and power . (1. Skilled labour counts only as simple labour intensified, or rather, as multiplied simple labour, a given quantity of skilled being considered equal to a greater quantity of simple labour. But at this point the mistakes also begin. c, p. J. 1 Drainage on the most extensive scale, new methods of stall-feeding, and of the artificial cultivation of green crops, introduction of mechanical manuring apparatus, new treatment of clay soils, increased use of mineral manures, employ- ment of the steam-engine, and of all kinds of new machinery, more intensive cultivation generally, characterised this epoch. Parliament passed 5 Labour Laws between 1802 and 1833, but was shrewd enough not to vote a penny for their car- rying out, for the requisite officials, &c. A clear statement of the condition of the agricultural labour- ers in Ireland is to be found in the Reports of the Irish Poor Law Inspectors (1870). Thus Mr. Longe, one of the commissioners, found in Coventry and the neighbourhood boys of from 10 to 15 years em- ployed in driving the ribbon-looms, not to mention younger children who had to drive smaller machines. 1 The annual process of reproduction is easily understood, so long as we keep in view merely the sum total of the year's produc- tion. In Cork, where the strongest pos- sible demonstration of feeling took place, the masters, by exer- cising their power of turning the men out of employment, have defeated the movement. _ ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION (a.) England from 1846-1866 No period of modern society is so favourable for the study of capitalist accumulation as the period of the last 20 years. per week, during the latter part of 1862." 2 Even when working short time the rent was frequently deducted from the wages of the operatives. xxxi.) MACHINERY AND MQDERN INDUSTRY 479 shudder to go further." 1 "They are curious men," said one of the witnesses, a shoemaker, speaking of the masters, "they think it does a boy no harm to work too hard for half the year, if he is nearly idle for the other half." 2 In the same way as technical impediments, so, too, those "usages which have grown with the growth of trade" were and still are proclaimed by interested capitalists as obstacles due to the nature of the work. S., Gentleman. m., and all after that is over- time, and we seldom leave off working before 6 p. This part forms his variable capital. 25-27.) MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 445 The immediate result of machinery is to augment surplus- value and the mass of products in which surplus-value is em- bodied. 116.) 2 G. The historical progress and extension of exchanges de- velops the contrast, latent in commodities, between use-value and value. 1 Professor Cairnes, after stating that the superintendence of labour is a leading feature of production by slaves in the Southern States of North America, continues: "The peasant proprietor (of the North), appropriating the whole produce of his toil, needs no other stimulus to exertion. c, p» 159.) "L'economie sur les frais de production ne peu done etre autre chose que l'economie sur a quantity de travail employe" pour produire." (Sismondi, "Etudes," t. 1237.) "But you are not quite satisfied with the state of morality in the factories?" "No." (n. When a considerable advance in the powers of national industry has actually taken place, profits rise into comparative importance as a source of accumula- tion." (Richard Jones, "Textbook, &c," pp. Simply by opposing to weaving that other particular form of concrete labour (in this instance tailoring), which produces the equivalent of the product of weaving. The bones of the cotton- weavers are bleaching the plains of India." No doubt, in turning them out of this "temporal" world, the machinery caused them no more than "a temporary inconvenience." For the rest, since machin- ery is continually seizing upon new fields of production, its tem- porary effect is really permanent. Exclusive of vagabonds, crim- inals, prostitutes, in a word, the "dangerous" classes, this layer of society consists of three categories. Thus, e.g., Mr. Snell reports it to be a common oc- currence in Somersetshire that, when a poor person claims parish relief, he is compelled to take his children from school. as to the employment of women?" "The feeling is that it is degrading; and we wish as miners to have more respect to the fair sex than to see them placed on the pit bank . Let us now pass from the commodity considered as a use- value to the value of commodities. The whole of the stolen clan- land she divided into 29 great sheep farms, each inhabited by a single family, for the most part imported English farm-servants. Commodities are things, and therefore without power of resistance against man. Hence, the second peculiarity of the equivalent form is, that concrete labour becomes the form under which its opposite, ab- stract human labour, manifests itself. 6, 452, 83). These changes are, however, continually interrupted by periods 1 See "Reports, &c, 31 Oct., 1856," p. Wherever, therefore, circumstances allowed it, a reduction of wages of at least 25% took place. G. "Violent revulsions of this nature," he says, "display short- sighted man in the contemptible character of a self-tormentor." A few pages before he states the contrary. "This did wonderfully concern the might and mannerhood of the kingdom to have farms as it were of a standard sufficient to maintain an able body out of penury, and did in effect amortise a great part of the lands of the kingdom unto the hold and occupation of the yeomanry or middle peo- ple, of a condition between gentlemen, and cottagers and peasants For it hath been held by the general opinion of men of best judgment in the wars.... m." 1 Already, in December, 1848, Leonard Horner had a list of 65 manufacturers and 29 over- lookers who unanimously declared that no system of supervi- sion could, under this relay system, prevent enormous over-work. 67, 68, 112 The main question: "How is the price of labour determined?" West, however, dismisses with mere banalities. 2,607,153 ts. I., pp. A great stock, though with small profits, generally increases faster than a small stock with great profits." (1. 1861.) Sir John Gordon stated before the committee of 1855, that "in consequence of these adulterations, the poor man, who lives on two pounds of bread a day, does not now get one fourth part of nourishing matter, let alone the deleterious effects on his health." Tremenheere states (1. I demand the normal working-day because I, like every other seller, demand the value of my commodity. In these tribunals, the masters sat in judgment on themselves. that the principal strength of an army consisteth in the infantry or foot* And to make good infantry it requireth men bred, not in a servile or indigent fash- ion, but in some free and plentiful manner. Commodity-owner No. 1, may therefore be ready to sell, before No. 2 is ready to buy. 1 . Our first inquiry then is, how the in- struments of labour are converted from tools into machines, or what is the difference between a machine and the implements of a handicraft? 592 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION by him, because he does not eat it, i.e., because he performs the function of a capitalist, and enriches himself. Does a man wish to better himself, to go as a plate-layer on the railway, or to begin quar- ry-work, the same power is ready with 'Work for me at this low rate of wages, or begone at a week's notice; take your pig with you, and get what you can for the potatoes growing in your garden.' Should his interest appear to be better served by it, an enhanced rent is sometimes preferred in these cases by the owner (i.e., the farmer) as the penalty for leaving his service." (Dr. Hun- ter, 1. If we proceed further, and compare the process of producing value with the labour-process, pure and simple, we find that the latter consists of the useful labour, the work, that produces use-values. . In the production of the coat, human labour-power, in the shape of tailoring, must have been actually expended. To carry on the trade as a manufacture, with concentration of work- men, is, in the watch trade, profitable only under exceptional con- ditions, because competition is greater between the labourers who desire to work at home, and because the splitting up of the work into a number of heterogeneous processes, permits but little use of the instruments of labour in common, and the capitalist, by scat- tering the work, saves the outlay on workshops, &c. 79, § 174). 258- 261). No child or young person shall be employed more than five hours before 1 p. Appropriation of Supplementary Labour-power by Capital. (1. to 10 p. It is the value and not the mass of these necessaries that varies with the productiveness of labour. Of the 150,000 persons employed in England in the produc- tion of lace, about 10,000 fall under the authority of the Fac- tory Act, 1861. c, p. And then, we must not forget, that the so-called skilled labour does not occupy a large space in the field of national labour. xiii.) On the importance of sunlight for the maintenance and growth of the body, a physician writes: "Light also acts upon the tissues of the body directly in hardening them and supporting their elasticity. I have heard on good au- 1 thority of a cloth weighing 8 lbs. c, p. "Order must in one way or another be established," exclaims in 1770 the oft-cited author of the "Essay on Trade and Commerce." "Order," re-echoes Dr. Andrew Ure 66 years later, "Order" was wanting in manufac- ture based on "the scholastic dogma of division of labour," and "Arkwright created order." At the same time manufacture was unable, either to seize upon the production of society to its full, extent, or to revolution- ise that production to its very core. Hence Aristotle: "since chrematistic is a double science, one part belonging to commerce, the other to economic, the latter being necessary and praiseworthy, the former based on circulation and with justice disapproved (for it is not based on Nature, but on mutual cheating), therefore the usurer is most rightly hated, because money itself is the source of his gain, and is not used for the purposes for which it was invented. The English Factory Inspectors, on the other hand, declared that the Home Secretary had no power dictatorially to suspend the law, and continued their legal proceedings against the pro-slavery rebellion. The labourers give these order- notes back just as constantly to the capitalist class, and in this way get their share of their own product. As William Petty puts it, labour is its father and the earth its mother. Let the value of the linen vary, x that of the coat remaining constant. Yarn, linen, coarse woollen stuffs-- things whose raw materials had been within the reach of every peasant family, had been spun and woven by it for its own use — were now transformed into articles of manufac- ture, to which the country districts at once served for markets. In every case the working-class creates by the surplus-labour of one year the capital destined -to em- ploy additional labour in the following year. THE WORKING-DAY 291 sometimes divided into from 12 to 14 categories, which them- selves constantly changed and rechanged their constituent parts. c, p. We," it goes on to say, "would ask if the practice of working over- time by a number of hands, is likely to create a good feeling between mas- ters and servants. 1 When the production of commodities has sufficiently ex- tended itself, money begins to serve as the means of payment beyond the sphere of the circulation of commodities. c, p. . 3 "Public Health. Fact., 31st Oct., 1865," pp. Of course the occupation must not be too severe, nor irksome, or unhealthy. The bourgeoisie, at its rise, wants and uses the power of the state to "regulate" wages, i.e., to force them within the limits suitable for surplus- value making, to lengthen the working-day and to keep the la- bourer himself in the normal degree of dependence. Owing to the previous adjustment of several items it is very imperfect; nevertheless for our purpose it is sufficient. This journal, then the most important Liberal organ, sent spe- cial commissioners into the agricultural districts, who did not content themselves with mere general descriptions and statistics* 1 Parry, i. 2 L. The last clause speaks volumes as to the over-work in this old-fashioned, homely line of business. Kinnaird: "Some of the boys are keepers of doors?" "Yes." "Is there not gen- erally a very great draught every time you open a door or close it?" "Yes, generally there is." "It sounds a very easy thing, but it is in fact rather a painful one?" "He is imprisoned there just the same as if he was in a cell of a gaol." Bourgeois Vivian: "When- ever a boy is furnished with a lamp cannot he read?" "Yes, he can read, if ho finds himself in candles ... On the other hand, during the same twenty years, the number of large farms in- creased; those of 300-500 acres rose from 7,771 to 8,410, those of more than 500 acres from 2,755 to 3,914, those of more than 1,000 acres from 492 to 582. xxvi. and 5.30 a. But it has never once asked the question why labour is represented by the value of its product and labour- time by the magnitude of that value. c, p. Fact, for 31st October, 1856," p. Hence, it is plain, the labourer, in our example, works one half of the day for himself, the other half for the capitalist. 48, 49.) 2 Sir James Steuart, a writer altogether remarkable for his quick eye lor the characteristic social distinctions between different modes of produc- tion, says: "Why do large undertakings in the manufacturing way ruin private industry, but by coming nearer to the simplicity of slaves?" ("Prin. of yarn, or the price of one pound is eighteenpence. of coal per horse-power per hour during 60 hours, and in- clusive of that consumed in heating the mill), 11 tons a week at 8s. 141.) 2 One of the material bases of the power of the State over the small disconnected producing organisms in India, was the regulation of the water supply. 6d. (2) As wealth increases, the less precious metal is thrust out by the more precious from its place as a measure of value, copper by silver, silver by gold, however much this order of se- quence may be in contradiction with poetical chronology. Is the great manufacturing interest of this country to be treated as a secondary matter in order to save some little trouble to Inspectors and Sub-Inspectors of Factories?" 4 All these shifts naturally were of no avail. This latter value decreases with the decrease of the labour-time neces- sary for its reproduction; the total decrease being the sum of all the different curtailments of labour-time effected in those various and distinct industries. What you gain in la- bour I lose in substance. * "The cupidity of mill-owners whose cruelties in the pursuit of gain have hardly been exceeded by those perpetrated by the Spaniards on the conquest of America in the pursuit of gold." John Wade, "History ol the Middle and Working Classes," 3rd Ed. London, 1835, p 114. It is as clear as noon-day, that man, by his industry, changes the forms of the materials furnished by Nature, in such a way as to make them useful to him. These things are very difficult to be brought about; but they are not impracticable, since they have been effected 1 J. It is, besides, obvious that the rate of profit may depend on circum- stances that in no way affect the rate of surplus-value. Whether the value of cotton rise from one shilling to two shillings, or fall to sixpence, the workman invariably preserves in the product of one hour only one half as much value as he preserves in two hours. Dr. Boothroyd, a medical practitioner at Hanley, says: "Each successive generation of potters is more dwarfed and less robust than the preceding one." In like man- ner another doctor, Mr. M'Bean: "Since he began to practise among the potters 25 years ago, he had observed a marked de- generation especially shown in diminution of stature and breadth." These statements are taken from the report of Dr. Greenhow in I860. 555.) 4 R. Exertion to-day is 1 "A Dissertation on the Poor Laws. The expanded form of value comes into actual ex- istence for the first time so soon as a particular product of labour, such as cattle, is no longer exceptionally, but habitually, ex- changed for various other commodities. The usual working-hours are from 8 in the morning till eight in the evening, with 1-z- hours for meals, which are taken at irregular intervals, and often in the foul workrooms. . The social division of labour causes his labour to be as one-sided as his wants are many-sided. c, p. Without, however, anticipating the subsequent development of our inquiry, from the mere connexion of the historic facts before us, it follows: First. although in practice this profit is immediately turned into capital, and set in motion with the original." (F. The metal that for the time being was estimated below its value, was withdrawn from circulation, melted and exported. lOd. The amount of this fall, the lowest limit of which is 3 shillings (the new value of labour-power), depends on the relative 1 To this third law MacGulloch has made, amongst others, this absurd addition, that a rise in surplus-value, unaccompanied by a fall in the value of labour-power, can occur through the abolition of taxes payable by the cap- italist. It is true that by means of the elementary form, the value of a commodity A, becomes expressed in terms of one, and only one, other commodity. (See the above cited Blue book, as also the report of "the committee of 1855 on the adulteration of bread," and Dr. Hassall's "Adulterations Detected," 2nd Ed. Lond. The necessity for a value-form grows with the increasing number and variety of the commodities ex- changed. 1 "Essay on the Rate of Wages: with an Examination of the Causes of the Differences in the Condition of the Labouring Population throughout the World," Philadelphia, 1835. 1 "Combien de fois n'avons-nous pas vu, dans certains ateliers, embau- cher beaucoup plus d'ouvriers que ne le demandait le travail a mettre en main? This is the case not only with all production on a large scale, whether employing machinery or not, but also with the so-called domestic industry, whether carried on in the houses of the workpeople or in small workshops. Since past labour always disguises itself as capital, i.e., since the passive of the labour of A, B, C, etc., takes the form of the active of the non-labourer X, bourgeois and political economists are full of praises of the services of dead and gone labour, which, according to the Scotch genius MacCulloch, ought to receive a special remuneration in the shape of interest, profit, etc. The master prosecutes again, the court condemns again, although one of the judges, Mr. Shee, publicly denounces this as a le- gal monstrosity, by which a man can periodically, as long as he lives, be punished over and over again for the same offence or crime. for the shoemakers, and gave a total average of 9.9 lbs, per adult weekly. A commodity is a use-value or object of utility, and a value. In that case he treads on dangerous ground. B. of his translation of A. 4,648,611 yds. 180 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION bones for the determination of extinct species of animals. This co-operation begins only with the labour-process, but they have then ceased to belong to themselves. He says, industrial capitalists make profits because "they all sell for more than it has cost to produce. 1845, p. 34, 35.) It is natu- rally still more convenient to understand by value nothing at all. 253.) 2 "Mr. E., a manufacturer. II. 1,836,310 No. 136,578 Acres. A single person cannot carve a working-day of more than, say 12 hours, out of the natural day, but 100 men co-operating extend the working-day to 1,200 hours. In addition to these two principal classes, there is a numerically unimportant class of persons, whose occupation it is to look after the whole of the ma- chinery and repair it from time to time; such as engineers, mechan- ics, joiners, &c. 416.) Long before Ricardo, Arthur Young, a fanatical upholder of surplus- produce, for the rest, a rambling, uncritical writer, whose reputation is in the inverse ratio of his merit, says, "Of what use, in a modern kingdom, would be a whole province thus divided [in the old Roman manner, by small independent peasants], however well cultivated, except for the mere purpose of breeding men, which taken singly is a most useless purpose?" (Arthur Young: "Political Arithmetic, &c." London, 1774, p. Growth of capital involves growth of its variable constituent or of the part invested in labour-power. By a Farmer." London, 1773, p. It refused to throw chil- dren of 13 under the Juggernaut Car of capital for more than 8 hours a day, and the Act of 1833 came into full operation. First, the individual differences balance one another in the workshop as a whole, which thus supplies in a given working-time the aver- age product, and the total wages paid will be the average wages of that particular branch of industry. Money, on the contrary, as the medium of circulation, keeps continually within the sphere of circulation, and moves about in it. The law demonstrated above now, therefore, takes this form: the masses of value and of surplus-val- ue produced by different capitals — the value of labour-power be- RATE AND MASS OF SURPLUS-VALUE 307 ing given and its degree of exploitation being equal — vary di- rectly as the amounts of the variable constituents of these capi- tals , i.e. , as their constituents transformed into living labour-power. There is in reality nothing very strange in this result. At first, therefore, these new parts are just as transient and alternating as those of seller and buyer, and are in turns played by the same actors. How did the owner become possessed of it? That which is produced is a new use-value in which the old exchange-value re-appears. MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 495 The Inquiry Commission of 1840 had made revelations so terrible, so shocking, and creating such a scandal all over Europe, that to salve its conscience Parliament passed the Mining Act of 1842, in which it limited itself to forbidding the employment underground in mines of children under 10 years of age and fe- males. 55.) "Capital is commodities." (James Mill: "Elements of Pol. c, p. . If the labourer wants all his time to produce the necessary means of subsistence for himself and his race, he has no time left in which to work gratis for others. The absolute population here increases much more quickly than in the mother-country, because many labourers enter this world as ready-made adults, and yet the labour-market is always understocked. Surplus-labour and necessary labour glide one into the other. xii. . is for clothes, and if the parish think proper to fmd clothes, the 3d. The wage-form thus extinguishes every trace of the division of the working-day into necessary la- bour and surplus-labour, into paid and unpaid labour. For instance, if a spinning machine lasts for 10 years, it is plain that during that working period its total value is gradually transferred to the product of the 10 years. But even the product of labour itself has un- dergone a change in our hands. ("An Essay on Trade and Com- merce," London, 1770, p. c, p. By an unlimited extension of the working-day, you may in one day use up a quantity of labour- power greater than I can restore in three. Goal consumed (for 100 horse-power indicated, at 4 lbs. With regard to actual receipts there is, therefore, great variety according to the different skill, strength, energy, staying- power, etc., of the individual labourers. The first chief function of money is to supply commodities with the material for the expression of their values, or to represent their values as magnitudes of the same denomination, qualitatively equal, and quantitatively comparable. These letters originally appeared in The Times. they (the workmen) think that the verdict is not in accordance with the evidence given generally." (ns. F. All the slave's labour appears as unpaid labour. "By the infirmity of human nature," says friend Ure, "it happens that the more skilful the workman, the more self-willed and intractable he is apt to become, and of course the less fit a component of a mechanical system in which... It is the agri- culture of the West Indies, which has been for centuries prolific of fabulous wealth, that has engulfed millions of the African race. And spindles, looms, raw material, are now transformed, from means of independent existence for the spinners and weavers, into means for commanding them and sucking out of them unpaid labour. The use of my labour-power and the spo- liation of it are quite different things. They were turned en masse into beggars, robbers, vagabonds, partly from inclination, in most cases from stress of circumstances. But it cannot acquire the properties of a socially recognised universal equivalent, except by being converted into money. The quaker gentlemen were mulcted in £20. * First Report, &c. And a given quantity of any commodity contains a definite quantity of human labour. c, t. (14 lb) 34.2 Hay, 1,609,569 1,678,493 68,924 Hay, tons, . of coffee. Ch. Morton, Art., "La- bourer," where this method is recommended to the farmers as an approved one. If, e.g., the number of labourers is a million, and the average working-day of a labourer is 10 hours, the social working- day consists of ten million hours. Besides these purely physical limitations, the extension of the working-day encounters moral ones. 889.) 4 "Nothing can have an intrinsick value." (N. The two inverse changes undergone by the same commodity are reflected in the displacement, twice repeated, but in opposite directions, of the same pieces of coin. The owner of the money has paid the value of a day's labour-power; his, therefore, is the use of it for a day, a 194 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION day's labour belongs to him. But the two commodities whose identity of quality is thus assumed, do not play the same part. They form two distinct acts, of polar and opposite characters, when performed by one single person. These are all referable to the constitution of man himself (race, &c), and to surrounding Nature. ("A Discourse of the General Notions of Money, Trade, and Exchanges, as They Stand in Relation each to other." By a Merchant! Lond., 1695, p. If then his appearance in the market is to be continuous, and the continuous conversion of money into capital assumes this, the seller of labour-power must perpetuate himself, "in the way that every living individual 1 Hence the Roman Villieus, as overlooker of the agricultural slaves, received "more meagre fare than working slaves, because his work was lighter." (Th. Mommsen, Rom. But just as, upon every such transmutation of a commodity, its two forms, commodity-form and money-form, exist simulta- neously but at opposite poles, so every seller has a buyer opposed to him, and every buyer a seller. . . CONTRADICTIONS IN THE FORMULA OF CAPITAL 165 interest is money of money, so that of all modes of making a liv- ing, this is the most contrary to Nature." 1 In the course of our investigation, we shall find that both merchants' capital and interest-bearing capital are derivative forms, and at the same time it will become clear, why these two forms appear in the course of history before the modern standard form of capital. It is not enough that the conditions of labour are concen- trated in a mass, in the shape of capital, at the one pole of society, while at the other are grouped masses of men, who have noth- ing to sell but their labour-power. And this is to be seen in France, and Italy, and some other parts abroad, where in effect all is noblesse or peasantry.... And this simply requires to be calculated. In 16 of the houses visited, only 1 man that earned 10s. It realises itself now in profit for a few capitalists. 3 "For a great part of the time," says Mr. Howell, "owing to the depression of trade, many factories were altogether closed, and a still greater number were working short time. 27.) 1 "lis conviennent que plus on peut, sans prejudice, epargner de frais ou de travaux dispendieux dans la fabrication des ouvrages des artisans, plus cette epargne est profitable par la diminution des prix de ces ouvrages. c.) 1 See Goethe's "Faust." 594 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION a thousand sources of sudden enrichment. 632 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION This is a law of population peculiar to the capitalist mode of production; and in fact every special historic mode of production has its own special laws of population, historically valid within its limits alone. . II., p. wages may very materially differ in amount... By one of the People called Christians," 4th Edition, Oxford, 1784, Dr. Home, Bishop of Norwich, reproves Adam Smith, because in a published letter to Mr. Strahan, he "embalmed his friend David" (sc. He declares, therefore, that Ireland is still over-populated, and the stream of emigration still flows too lazily. To the extent that commodity pro- duction, in accordance with its own inherent laws, develops fur- ther, into capitalist production, the property laws of com- modity production change into the laws of capitalist appropri- ation. 523.) 2 Buchez et Roux: "Histoire Parlementaire," t. 3 This simultaneity, it is true, is due to the general 1 "In so close a cohabitation of the people, the carriage must needs be less." ("The Advantages of the East India Trade," p. Such a fall in the value of labour-power implies, however, that the same necessaries of life which were formerly produced in ten hours, can now be produced in nine hours. From 1850-61 Geneva produced 720,000 watches. G. . These five detail workers are so many special organs of a single working organism that acts only as a whole, and therefore can operate only by the direct co- operation of the whole five. Like all others it has a value. Every long-winded undertaking, extending over several years and demanding outlay of fixed capital, is prevented from being carried out. On the other hand, when 3 years later, the cattle disease broke out, Parliament broke wildly through its usages and voted, straight off, millions for indemnifying the millionaire landlords, whose farmers in any event came off without loss, owing to the rise in the price of meat The bull- like bellow of the landed proprietors at the opening of Parliament, in 1866, showed that a man can worship the cow Sabala without being a Hindu, and can change himself into an ox without being a Jupiter. The nominal wages rose in consequence part- ly of the bank-note depreciation, partly of a rise in the price of the primary means of subsistence independent of this deprecia- tion. Withdrawn from circulation, they become petrified into a hoard, and though they remained in that state till doomsday, not a single farthing would accrue to them. Either equivalents are exchanged, and then the labourer receives 6s. Had he been a friend of the worthy ingenious Horrox he would have believed that the moon sometimes disappeared in a clear sky without the interposition of a cloud... c, pp. The ratio between the wages paid by the farmer, and the wage-deficit made good by the parish, shows us two things. Engels, "Umrisse zu einer Kritik der Nationalokonomie," 1. 666 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION the "abstinence" of the capitalist from all expenditure that is not absolutely unavoidable. 5 After what has just been said, it will be understood that the Report of the Commission classes journeymen bakers among the short-lived labourers, who, having by good luck escaped the nor- mal decimation of the children of the working-class, rarely reach the age of 42. This transfer takes place during the conversion of those means into a product, or in other words, during the labour-process. 196,208. In Book IV. . The introduction of power-looms into England probably reduced by one-half the labour required to weave a given quantity of yarn into cloth. This is no defect, but, on the contrary, admirably adapts the price-form to a mode of production whose inherent laws impose themselves only as the mean of appar- ently lawless irregularities that compensate one another. How then is the value, e.g., of a 12 hours' work- ing-day to be determined? The labour itself, owing to the feverish haste of the machinery, demands unceasing application of skill and movement, under the control of a watchfulness that never tires, and it seems somewhat hard, to let parents apply the term "idling" to their own children, who, after allow- ing for meal-times, are fettered for 10 whole hours to such an occupation, in such an atmosphere.... of Insp. 2 The increase in the price of labour with the extension of the working- day beyond a certain normal limit, takes such a shape in various British industries that the low price of labour during the so-called normal time compels the labourer to work during the better paid over-time, if he wishes to obtain a sufficient wage at all. The ruins of former dwelling-houses, barns, stables, &c," are the sole traces of the former inhabitants. 630 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION composition of capital, of a more accelerated diminution of its variable, as compared with its constant constituent. Lastly, he puts down £1,200 for depreciation of machinery, because "the weather and the natural principle of decay do not suspend their operations because the steam-engine ceases to revolve." He says, emphati- cally, he does not estimate his depreciation at more than the small sum of £1,200, because his machinery is already nearly worn out. Moreover, the breaking-up of surplus-value into fragments neither alters its nature nor the conditions under which it becomes an element of accumulation. c, p. Take, for instance, the manufacture of glass bottles. These girls carried daily 10 tons up the slippery sides of the clay pits, from a depth of 30 feet, and then for a distance of 210 feet. In turns and transiently it attaches itself first to this and then to that commodity. The use-values, coat, linen, &c, i.e., the bodies of commodi- ties, are combinations of two elements— matter and labour. In the stormy youth of Modern Industry, especially from 1797 to 1815, it served as a lever for the lengthening of the working-day, and the lowering of wages. c, pp. 38, 39.) COMMODITIES 77 aimed at. This is proved, as well by the complaints of contemporary agriculturists, as by the term "horse-power," which has survived to this day as an expression for mechanical force. "I am a Christian." "Thou liest," thundered back the great Judge, "thou art nought but a Ciceronian." 104 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION generally the way in which real contradictions are reconciled. 82, n. "The rich had got possession of the greater part of the undivided land. c, Vol. 630 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION to the reader. At the beginning of 1867 the manufacturers resorted to their usual way out of the difficulty, viz., reducing wages 5 per cent. Fifty thousand workpeople, who had MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 429 previously lived by carding wool, petitioned Parliament against Arkwright's scribbling mills and carding engines. The value-form of the product of labour is not only the most abstract, but is also the most universal form, taken by the product in bourgeois production, and stamps that production as a particular species of social production, and thereby gives it its special historical character. A striking example of the second kind, is the needle-making ma- chine. . If we consider the process of production from the point of view of the simple labour-process, the labourer stands in relation to the means of production, not in their quality as capital, but as the mere means and material of his own intelligent productive activity. 117.) 2 E.g., in paper-staining before the recent introduction into this trade of the Factory Act. of 1866, states: "It is unhappily, to a painful degree, apparent throughout the whole of the evidence, that against no persons do the children of both sexes so much require protection as against their parents." The system of unlimited exploitation of chil- dren's labour in general and the so-called home-labour in particu- lar is "maintained only because the parents are able, without check or control, to exercise this arbitrary and mischievous pow- er over their young and tender offspring. 2 Translator's nite. c, p. With the very earliest development of the circulation of commodities, there is also developed the necessity, and the pas- sionate desire, to hold fast the product of the first metamorphosis. of yarn annually, having a value of £12,000. If therefore, the capitalist who applies the new method, sells his commodity at its social value of one shil- ling, he sells it for threepence above its individual value, and thus realises an extra surplus-value of threepence. 1 Since the expression of the value of commodities in gold is a merely ideal act, we may use for this purpose imaginary or ideal money. All the linen in the market counts but as one article of commerce, of which each piece is only an aliquot part. Edit. 90, 91.) THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 633 pressure, crisis and stagnation, depends on the constant forma- tion, the greater or less absorption, and the re-formation of the industrial reserve army or surplus-population. of yarn, so now, 20 lbs. .] and a population, for which the houses were not intended and quite unfit, has been created, whose surroundings are truly degrading to the adults and ruinous to the children." 1 The more rapidly capital accumulates in an industrial or commer- cial town, the more rapidly flows the stream of exploitable human material, the more miserable are the improvised dwellings of the labourers. . Holland had ceased to be the nation prepon- derant in commerce and industry. But coats and linen, like every other element of material wealth that is not the spontaneous produce of Nature, must invariably owe their existence to a special productive activ- ity, exercised with a definite aim, an activity that appropriates particular nature-given materials to particular human wants. 3 It looks very like intentional misleading by statistics (which mislead- ing it would be possible to prove in detail in other cases too), when the Eng- lish factory legislation excludes from its operation the class of labourers last mentioned in the text, while the parliamentary returns expressly include in the category of factory operatives, not only engineers, mechanics, &c. Suppose a spinner to have advanced a capital of £10,000, of which four-fifths (£8,000) are laid out in cotton, machinery, &c, and one-fifth (£2,000) in wages. It was expressly forbidden to treat money as a commodity. Or perhaps Bastiat means, that a mode of production based on slavery is based on a system of plunder. i.) The celebrated passage in the same chapter that begins with the words, "Observe the accommodation of the most common artificer or day-labourer in a civilised and thriving country," &c, and then proceeds to depict what DIVISION OF LABOUR AND MANUFACTURE 355 independent labours of the cattle-breeder, the tanner, and the shoemaker? 2 labourer. In order to tell us that its own value is created by labour in its abstract character of human labour, it says that the coat, in so far as it is worth as much as the linen, and therefore is value, consists of the same la- bour as the linen. The facts themselves are confirmed by many other writers of the time, amorig others by Josiah Tucker. . If he must make two pairs in the same time, the productiveness of his labour must be doubled; and this cannot be done, except by an alteration in his tools or in his mode of working, or in both. (20 yards of linen =1 coat or =10 lbs. . c, pp. In any given branch of industry cen- tralisation would reach its extreme limit if all the individual capitals invested in it were fused into a single capital. For the capitalist as buyer paid for each commodity, for the cotton, the spindle and the labour-power, its full value. Here everything remains about as it was: children more than 10 years of age may work 5*/ 2 hours a day; or 6 hours and Saturday off; young persons and women, 10 hours on 5 days, and at most 6^2 on Saturday. Out of this latter sum, then, we reckon as advanced for the purpose of turning out the product, the sum of £54 alone, which the machinery loses by wear and tear in the process; for this is all it parts with to the product. 66- 69.) "The difference between real value and exchange-value is based upon this fact, namely, that the value of a thing is different from the so-called equivalent given for it in trade, i.e., that this equivalent is no equivalent." (F. With a general fall in the prices of commodities, the quan- tity of the circulating medium will remain constant, provided the number of commodities increase proportionally to their fall in price, or provided the velocity of currency decrease in the same proportion. Comm., IV. Now-a-days, all machines that have their way to make, such as sewing-machines, bread-making machines, &c, are, unless from their very nature their use on a small scale is excluded, constructed to be driven both by human and by purely mechanical motive power. "They felt themselves oppressed, but not exactly by the Factory Act." 3 But if the manufacturers did not succeed in making the work- people speak as they wished, they themselves shrieked all the louder in press and Parliament in the name of the workpeople. . 160 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION frequently used by modern economists, more especially when the point is to show, that the exchange of commodities in its developed form, commerce, is productive of surplus-value. w 5 « a o *^ U (9 a> <« 3 2— c ath-ra Imona ns per les. 2 Classic economy has, on account of a deficient analysis of the labour- process, and of the process of creating value, never properly grasped this weighty element of reproduction, as may be seen in Ricardo; he says, e.g., whatever the change in productive power, "a million men always produce in manufactures the same value." This is accurate, if the extension and degree of intensity of their labour are given. First, the falling of wages below their minimum; second, the degree in which the agricultural labourer was a com- pound of wage-labourer and pauper, or the degree in which he had been turned into a serf of his parish. 450 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION of rest, during which there is a mere quantitative extension of the factories on the existing technical basis. is obliged to buy at the seller's own terms, his modicum of tea, sugar, flour, soap, can- dles, and beer." (1. 2yd., 1 3 needle-women 2s. m., and leaves off a quarter of an hour (sometimes more, sometimes less) after 6 p. But 1 Under the rule of invariable equivalents commerce would be impos- sible. Just as in the simple circu- lation of commodities the double change of place of the same piece of money effects its passage from one hand into another, so here the double change of place of the same commodity brings about the reflux of the money to its point of departure. The objective form of the social labour expended in its production. . We saw, in the first place, that the original conversion of a sum of values into capital was achieved in complete accordance with the laws of exchange. A large number of those employed by the undersellers are foreigners and youths, who are obliged to accept almost any wages they can obtain." 1 This jeremiad is also interesting because it shows, how the appearance only of the relations of production mirrors itself in the brain of the capitalist. 2 In the United States the restoration, in this way, of handicrafts based on machinery is frequent; and therefore, when the inevitable transition to the factory system shall take place, the ensuing concentration will, compared with Europe and even with England, stride on in seven-league boots. In order that a man may be able to sell commodities other than labour-power, he must of course have the means of produc- tion, as raw material, implements, &c. The labour does therefore not di- minish in the same ratio as its productivity increases. 2 I. The town was, therefore, in 1865, more full than ever. (What cynical naivete!) We think that the increase would be more than the trade, with due regard to its being successfully carried out, could fairly bear. "I assume, throughout, the state of things which, where the labourers and capitalists are separate classes, prevails, with few exceptions, universally; namely, that the capitalist advances the whole expenses, including the entire remuneration of the labourer." Strange optical illusion to see everywhere a state of things which as yet exists only exceptionally on our earth. The advance consisted in a change of form of this servitude, in the transformation of feudal exploitation into capitalist exploitation. In every country, certain days of the year become by habit recognised settling days for various large and recurrent payments. If the productive power of all the different sorts of useful labour required for the production of a coat remains unchanged, the sum of the values of the coats produced increases with their number. Not only is the detail work distributed to the different individuals, but the individual himself is made the automatic motor of a fractional operation, 2 and the absurd fable of Menenius Agrippa, which makes man a mere fragment of his own body, becomes realised. 3 Although this absence of regularity in the expenditure of labour-power is 1 "Rep. Like all other laws it is modified in its working by many circumstances, the analysis of which does not concern us here. In oppo- sition to Spinoza, it believes that "ignorance is a sufficient reason." The labour which is set in motion by the total capital of a so- ciety, day in, day out, may be regarded as a single collective work- ing-day. 306 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION the greatest possible mass of surplus-value. var.-|-3s. In Septem- ber, 1864, Dr. Simon reports that the Chairman of the Nuisances Removal Committee of the parish of Sevenoaks sent the following denunciation to Sir George Grey, Home Secretary: — "Small-pox cases were rarely heard of in this parish until about twelve months ago. There is nothing mysterious in this. 690. Geschichte, 1856, p. . THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 703 marked off by a wide channel from the country to which it yields corn, wool, cattle, industrial and military recruits. c, Book II., ch. Say, re- marks on this point: "Where division of labour is well developed, the skill of the labourer is available only in that particular branch in which it has been MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 441 stream of men, who furnish a contingent from which to fill up vacancies, and to draw a supply for expansion. The limits of this book compel us to concern ourselves chiefly with the worst paid part of the industrial proletariat, and with the agri- cultural labourers, who together form the majority of the woik- ing-class. CO-OPERATION 327 Although a number of men may be occupied together at the same time on the same, or the same kind of work, yet the labour of each, as a part of the collective labour, may correspond to a distinct phase of the labour-process, through all whose phases, in conse- quence of co-operation, the subject of their labour passes with great- er speed. x., p. If, therefore (prices remaining the same), the factory could be kept at work thirteen hours in- stead of eleven and a half, with an addition of about £2,600 to the circulating capital, the net profit would be more than doubled. The property which the magnet possesses of at- tracting iron, became of use only after by means oi that property the po- larity of the magnet had been discovered. (Economic not Chrematistic has a limit... The resulting increased productive power is owing either to an increased expend- iture of labour-power in a given time— i.e., to increased inten- sity of labour — or to a decrease in the amount of labour-power unproductively consumed. . c. 2 "The slavery in which the bourgeoisie has bound the proletariat, comes nowhere more plainly into daylight than in the factory system. . 195. he pays the landowner his rent, the labourer his wages, the tax and tithe gatherer their claims, and keeps a large, indeed the largest, and a continually augmenting share, of the annual produce of labour for himself. For instance, 40 yards of linen are worth — what? The first form, 20 yds. This article either results from the mere mechani- cal fitting together of partial products made independently, or owes its completed shape to a series of connected processes and manipulations. c, p. des teinturiers, des encolleurs, puis des tisserands; mais its ne sont pas reunis dans un ineine etablissement, ne dependent pas d'un meme maitre; tons ils sont independants " (A. to each, a workman of appropriate value and cost was naturally assigned, forms the very essence of division of labour." On the other hand, he describes this division as "adaptation of labour to the different talents of men," and lastly, characterises the whole manufacturing system as "a system for the division or gradation of labour," as "the division of labour into degrees of skill," &c (Ure, I. 2 For this latter function, the genuine money-commodity, actual gold and silver, is necessary. Sweet commerce! The English East India Company, as is well known, obtained, besides the political rule in India, the exclusive monopoly of the tea-trade, as well as of the Chinese trade in general, and of the transport of goods to and from Europe. the in- fluence of the Poor Law in its provisions concerning settlement and chargeability. It was also prohibited in Cologne in 1676, at the same time that its in- troduction into England was causing disturbances among the work- people. l The accumulation of commodities in great masses is the result either of over-production or of a stoppage of circula- tion. It is no uncommon thing for 4 or 5 wealthy graziers to engross a large enclosed lordship which was before in the hands of 20 or 30 farmers, and as many smaller tenants and proprietors. The guilds zeal- ously repelled every encroachment by the capital of merchants, the only form of free capital with which they came in contact. It is only on this assumption that the various supplementary labour-processes can proceed uninterruptedly, simultaneously, and side by side. Each article costs, on an average, one shilling, and represents 2 hours of social labour; but under the al- tered mode of production it costs only ninepence, or contains only 1— hours' labour. The English edition is theoret- ically less important, but it contains numerous details referring specifi- cally to English commerce, bullion trade, etc., that are wanting in the French text. c. But as regards the instru- ments of labour, such as buildings, coal, machinery, and so on, it is different; the limit up to which the additional labour re- quired for their production can increase, varies with the differ- ence between the quantity of the machine-made article, and the quantity of the same article that the same number of workmen could make by hand. "The value of any commodity de- noting its relation in exchange, we may speak of it as ... 'The parallelograms of Mr. Owen' appear to be the only form of society, besides the bourgeois form, with which he was ac- quainted." (Karl Marx: "Zur Kritik, &c," pp. — F. 415. The change affects all commodities simultaneously, and, therefore, caeteris paribus, leaves their relative values inter se, unaltered, although those values are now expressed in higher or lower gold-prices. That happens only on its trans- formation into an industry carried on by machinery. Hence the number of the labourers that co-operate, or the scale of co-operation, depends, in the first instance, on the amount of capital that the individual capitalist can spare for the purchase of labour-power; in other words, on the extent to which a single capitalist has command over the means of subsist- ence of a number of labourers. to 4 p. Nevertheless, the laws for keeping them down remained in force, together with the ear-clipping and branding of those "whom no one was willing to take into service." By the Statute of Appren- tices 5 Elizabeth, c. London, 1689, p. . 16.) 2 "The possessors of surplus-produce or capital." ("The Source and Remedy of the National Difficulties. For example, let the working-day of each individual be 12 hours. 39-71. Three- fourths of the total increase of population has taken place in the towns." ("Census, &c," pp, 11 and 12.) THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 643 The third category of the relative surplus-population, the stagnant, forms a part of the active labour army, but with ex- tremely irregular employment. A locomotive, for instance, consists of more than 5,000 inde- pendent parts. 3 The accumulation of capital was attended at the same time by its concentration and centralisation. 318.) 8 In corals, each individual is, in fact, the stomach of the whole group; but it supplies the group with nourishment, instead of, like the Roman patrician, withdrawing it. Let the ordinary working-day contain 12 hours of which 6 are paid, 6 unpaid. That which is now to be expropriated is no longer the labourer working for himself, but the capitalist exploiting many labourers. c, p. the greater the order and regularity of every work, the same must needs be done in less time, the labour must be less." ("The Advantages," &c, p. Each cottage held from 2 to 6 looms; some belonged to the weaver, some were bought on credit, some were hired. 298, 299.) "Would it not en- tail very great expense if all these old workings were kept venti- lated?" "Yes, expense might be incurred, but life would be at the same time protected." (n. 5 1. But of all diseases they are especially prone to chest- disease, to pneumonia, phthisis, bronchitis, and asthma. c, p. Here and there, long before the period of manufacture, and also, to some extent, during that period, these implements pass over into machines, but without creating any revolution in the mode of production. 8d., 3s. 3. By this Parliamentary escamotage the means which the labourers could use in a strike or lock-out were withdrawn from the laws common to all citizens, and placed under exceptional penal legislation, the interpretation of which fell to the masters themselves in their capacity as justices of the peace. Out of 686 female patients who were lace- makers, most of them between the ages of 17 and 24, the number of consumptive ones were: 1852.— 1 in 45. We sum them up once again, but only in so far as they afford new points of view in regard to accumulation. for myself and tea.' The contract is binding only for the week. It was not long ere this credit-money, made by the bank itself, became the coin in which the Bank of England made its loans to the State, and paid, on account of the State, the interest on the public debt. This grows with the wealth of civil society. It is altogether impossible for a man who does so many things to do them all well. But in ascribing wages to the mother of the family we raise the question of the direction of the household. The excavations are small and damp, and have no drains or privies about them, and not the slightest means of ventilation except up a hole pulled through the top, and used for a chimney. Ces exces de veille et de travail usent la nature humaine, et de la vien qu' homines et femmes vieillissent beaucoup plutot dans les campagnes que dans les villes." (Mirabeau, 1. variable capital, the other half represents the 3s. not £590 but £180. Capitalist production, therefore, of itself reproduces the sep- aration between labour-power and the means of labour. c, p. THE RATE OP SURPLUS-VALUE 219 the amount of surplus-value be given, we have only to deduct it from this remainder, to find the variable capital. "Question 9 — Some of the more wealthy farmers in the parish have devised a skilful mode by which all the trouble of executing this Act (the 43rd of Elizabeth) might be avoided. of yarn, in which the whole of the value newly created during the process, is condensed, one half represents the equivalent for the value of the labour consumed, or the 3s. They are consumed from time to time, and their value re-appears in that new vigour imparted to his body and mind, forming fresh capital, to be employed again in the work of production." (F. of tea =40 lbs. On the other hand, it is absolutely false to say that "profits will be 20%." They will always be less, because they are calculated upon the sum total of the capital advanced. It is acknowl- edged by even the writers in defence of enclosures that these di- minished villages increase the monopolies of farms, raise the prices of provisions, and produce depopulation . This common "something" cannot be either a geometrical, a chemical, or any other natural property of commodities. G. And lastly, a particular kind of commodity acquires the character of universal equivalent, because all other commodities make it the material in which they uniformly express their value. Apart from this, with capitalist produc- tion an altogether new force comes into play— the credit system, which* in its first stages furtively creeps in as the humble as- sistant of accumulation, drawing into the hands of individual or associated capitalists, by invisible threads, the money resources which lie scattered, over the surface of society, in larger or smaller amounts; but it soon becomes a new and terrible weapon in the battle of competition and is finally transformed into an enormous social mechanism for the centralisation of capitals. 2 This progress in the rate of consumption ought to suffice for the most optimist of progressists, and for the biggest hawker of lies among the Free-trade bagmen of Germany. The labourer receives l-^d. . In the former case, it is a ques- tion of How and What, in the latter of How much? The whole form of the movement of modern industry depends, therefore, upon the constant transformation of a part of the labouring population into unemployed or half-employed hands. S. How great then is the confusion of ideas exhibited in the following ex- tract! "Mr. Ricardo says a portion of the labour of the engineer in making {stocking] machines" is contained for example in the value of a pair of stock- ings. On the other hand, in the product, in the 36 lbs. c, pp. 31 , 32.) No wonder that, true to the laws of God and of Nature, he always sold himself in the best market. 1 In order that these objects may enter into relation with each other as commodities, their guardians must place themselves in relation to one another, as persons whose will resides in those objects, and must behave in such a way that each does not appropriate the commodity of the other, and part with his own, except by means of an act done by mutual consent. The whole of our analysis of the production of surplus-value shows the absurdity of this con- clusion, even if Carey himself had proved his premises, instead of, after his usual uncritical and superficial fashion, shuffling to and fro a confused mass of statistical materials. The whole series of thefts, outrages, and popu- lar misery, that accompanied the forcible expropriation of the people, from the last third of the 15th to the end of the 18th cen- tury, lead him merely to the comfortable conclusion: "The due by force, so that they now were cultivating widely extended domains, instead of isolated fields. [called the rich] and themselves." (Edmund Burke, 1. The labourer himself is called a "bondsman." The rela- tionship here set up also shows how individual consumption by the labourer becomes consumption on behalf of capital — or productive consumption— from quite a new point of view: "It is curious to observe that the very dung of the hind and bondsman is the perquisite of the calculating lord ...and the lord will allow no privy but his own to exist in the neighbourhood, and will rather give a bit of manure here and there for a garden than bate any part of his seigneurial right." ("Public Health, Report VII., 1864," p. It was a pro-slavery rebellion in minia- ture, carried on for over two years with a cynical recklessness, a terrorist energy all the cheaper because the rebel capitalist risked nothing except the skin of his "hands." To understand that which follows we must remember that the Factory Acts of 1833, 1844, and 1847 were all three in force so far as the one did not amend the other: that not one of these limited the working-day of the male worker over 18, and that since 1833 the 15 hours from 5.30 a. They, on the con trary, imagine that they are subjects because he is king. It no longer suffices, therefore, that he should simply produce. 20-21. The only result would be that each of them would represent twice as many use-values as before; these use-values being twice as cheap as before. c, Vol. of Indian corn, 6^-d.; 3d. of Fact.," 31st. The industrial capitalists, these new potentates, had on their part not only to displace the guild masters of handicrafts, but also the feudal lords, the possessors of the sources of wealth. Each of these implies the corresponding inverted equation, 1 coat =20 yards of linen 10 lbs. Although by no means new — it figures side by side with time-wages officially in the French and English labour stat- utes of the 14th century — it only conquers a larger field for action during the period of Manufacture, properly so-called. 26,319,924* Centralisation has from 1851 to 1861 destroyed principally farms of the first three categories, under 1 and not over 15 acres. m. 100, 101.) CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO CAPITAL 603 increases in the same proportion as the quantity of labour em- ployed. False weights and measures. l Though a commodity may, side by side with its actual form (iron, for instance), take in our imagination the form of gold, yet it cannot at one and the same time actually be both iron and gold. The price or money-form of commodities is, like their form of value generally, a form quite distinct from their palpable bodily form; it is, therefore, a purely ideal or mental form. But with this, the extent of the working-day itself is not yet given. to 10s. 98 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION labour- it is the standard of price inasmuch as it is a fixed weight of metal. The adults work in two shifts, of eight hours each; but there is no alternation with the boys, on account of the expense (n. Take, for instance, the fattening of cattle, where the animal is the raw material, and at the same time an instrument for the production of manure. B. Nay, there is often not even need of one complete trade, but one man makes shoes for men, another for women. THE ABSTINENCE THEORY In the last preceding chapter, we treated surplus-value (or the surplus-product) solely as a fund for supplying the individual consumption of the capitalist. c, pp. Wages, 4 shillings a week. Of course capital also is advanced in the shape of money.... The number of power-looms in worsted mills was, in 1850, 32,617; in 1856, 38,956; in 1862, 43,048. 2 With regard to the work of the mere attendants, it can, to some extent, be replaced in the mill by machines, 3 and owing 1 Ure grants this. c, p. There is left the sum of £3 10s. Even the ideas of day and night, of rustic simplicity in the old statutes, became so confused that an English judge, as late as 1860, needed a quite Talmudic sagacity to explain "judicially" what was day and what was night. Where the capitalist has at his back the power of the mother-country, he tries to clear out of his way by force, the modes of production and appropriation, based on the independent labour of the producer. The greatest number (of things) have their value from supplying the wants of the mind." Nicholas Barbon: "A Discourse Con- cerning Coining the New Money Lighter. But such a state of reciprocal independence has no existence in a primitive society based on property in common, whether such a society takes the form of a patriarchal family, an ancient Indian community, or a Peruvian Inca State. Manufactures, accordingly, prosper most where the mind is least consulted, and where the workshop may ... m. The indi- vidual consumption of the labourer, whether it proceed within the workshop or outside it, whether it be part of the process of produc- tion or not, forms therefore a factor of the production and reproduc- tion of capital; just as cleaning machinery does, whether it be done while the machinery is working or while it is standing. MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 477 en. When the business of making the bread, rolls, &c, is over, that of its distribution begins, and a considerable proportion of the journeymen in the trade, after working hard in the manner described during the night, are upon their legs for many hours during the day, carrying baskets, or wheeling hand-carts, and sometimes again in the bakehouse, leaving off work at various hours between 1 and 6 p. "As values, all commodities are only definite masses of congealed labour-time." 1 The value of a commodity would therefore remain constant, if the labour-time required for its production also remained constant. The ages of the children and young persons run through all intermediate grades, from 8 (in some cases from 6) to 18. of iron, there exists in equal quantities something common to both. Des macons par exemple, occupes a faire passer de mains en mains des bn- ques a un echafaudage superieur, font tous la meme besogne, et pourtant ll existe parmi eux une espece de division de travail, qui consiste en ce que chacun d'eux fait passer la brique par unespace donne et que tous ensemble la font parvenir beaucoup plus promptement a l'endroit marque qu lis ne le feraient si chacun d'eux portait sa brique separement jusqu a 1 echaiauaage superieur." (F. Arber, Lond., 1869, p. Our capitalist has two objects in view: in the first place, he wants to produce a use-value that has a value in exchange, that is to say, an article destined to be sold, a commodity; and secondly, he desires to produce a commodity whose value shall be greater than the sum of the values of the commodities used in its pro- duction, that is, of the means of production and the labour-power, that he purchased with his good money in the open market. 503.) The same sort of hints in the 19th cen- tury. The papists do ours a great service, in that they don't drown, burn, murder all of them, or let them all rot in prison; but let some live, and only drive them out, or take from them what they have. c). As a matter of fact the apologists do not mean this sort of setting free. It is true, no doubt, as we have already seen, that every instrument of labour enters as a whole into the labour-proc- ess, and only piece-meal, proportionally to its average daily loss by wear and tear, into the value-begetting process. A simple geometrical illustration will make this clear. c, p. c, p. The exact form of this process is therefore M — C — M', where M' = M + AM =the original sum advanced, plus an increment. We assume the waste to be 6%: under these circumstances 10,600 lbs. Hence the most vigorous polemic, in the economic literature of that time, on the "enclosure of commons." From the mass of materials that lie before me, I give a few extracts that will throw a strong light on the circumstances of the time. 3 On the other hand, the French law proclaims as a principle that which in England was only won in the name of children, minors, and women, and has been only recently for the first time claimed as a general right. 155.) 2 "Public Health. One of its most finished creations was the workshop for the production of the instruments of labour themselves, including especially the complicated mechanical apparatus then already employed. . Yet the coat itself, the body of the commodity, coat, is a mere use-value. It is this movement that converts it into capital. Its value is determined not by the makes many pairs, and none of those pairs could have been done without any part of the machine." ("Obs. 67. 2 In the light of his dogma the commonest phenomena 1 Compare among others, Jeremy Bentham: "Theorie des Peines et des Recompenses," traduct. 2 Philanthropic English economists, like Mill, Rogers, Goldwin Smith, Fawcett, &c, and liberal manufacturers like John Bright & Co., ask the Eng- lish landed proprietors, as God asked Cain after Abel, Where are our thou- sands of freeholders gone? The alienation of labour-power and its actual appropriation by the buyer, its employment as a use-value, are separated by an inter- val of time. c, pp. Linguet's hypoth- esis that the patrician creditors from time to time prepared, beyond the Tiber, banquets of debtors' flesh, may remain as undecided as that of Daumer on the Christian Eucharist. g., in the branches of industry already mentioned, which are of an exceedingly fatigu- ing nature; the official working-day means for each worker usually 12 hours by night or day. 8 1. The working- day for "young persons and women," was raised from 10 to lOy hours for the first five days of the week, and was shortened to 1— on the Saturday. 23. V. 2 J. In the reign of James I., 1627, Roger Crocker of Front Mill, was condemned for having built 1 In his "Utopia," Thomas More says, that in England "your shepe that were wont to be so meke and tame, and so smal eaters, now, as I heare saye, be become so great devourers and so wylde that they eate up, and swallow downe, the very men themselfes." "Utopia," transl. When we throw both into the scales, we see in reality, that as weight they are both the same, and that, therefore, when taken in proper proportions, they have the same weight. For instance, suppose a cloth manufac- turer converts £2,000 into capital. An example will show, in conclusion, how this sophistication, peculiar to and characteristic of capitalist production, this complete inversion of the relation between dead and living labour, between value and the force that creates value, mirrors itself in the consciousness of capitalists. 1 Pillow lace-making is chiefly carried on in England in two agricultural districts; one, the Honiton lace district, extending from 20 to 30 miles along the south coast of Devonshire, and including a few places in North Devon; the other comprising a great part of the counties of Buckingham, Bedford, and North- ampton, and also the adjoining portions of Oxfordshire and Hunt- ingdonshire. Hence the velocity of the currency of money is measured by the number of moves made by a given piece of money in a given time. Eating is abstinence from fasting, walking, ab- stinence from standing still, working, abstinence from idling, idling, absti- CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO CAPITAL 597 sample this, of the discoveries of vulgar economy! It substitutes for an economic category, a sycophantic phrase— voild tout. Capital has its boundary of increase. They inform me, on opening the bales of cotton there is an intolerable smell, which causes sickness.... xxv., xxvi., n. 2 Where block- printing, the old method of printing calico by hand, has been superseded by machine printing, a single machine prints, with the aid of one man or boy, as much calico of four colours in one hour, as it formerly took 200 men to do. Hence the identity of sale and purchase implies that the commodity is useless, if, on being thrown into the alche- mistical retort of circulation, it does not come out again in the shape of money; if, in other words, it cannot be sold by its owner, and therefore be bought by the owner of the money. Parents must not possess the absolute power of making their children mere 'machines to earn so much weekly wage.'. l Therefore, the final result of every separate circuit, in which a purchase and consequent sale are completed, forms of itself the starting-point of a new circuit. From the economic standpoint this explanation is worth noth- ing, because the historical element is wanting. . Vivian: "Supposing that an enactment were passed preventing the employment of children under the age of 14, would it not be probable that . No- body — not even "a musician of the future" — can live upon future products, or upon use-values in an unfinished state; and ever since the first moment of his appearance on the world's stage, man always has been, and must still be a consumer, both before and while he is producing. c, Fourth Report, 63, p. If the use of machinery in agriculture is for the most part free from the injurious physical effect it has on the factory operative, its action in superseding to the bearing of these isolated elements of transformation, not only practi- cally made the factory system the sole foundation of his experiments, but also declared that system to be theoretically the starting-point of the social revolution. The words on the title-page of the English edition, according to which the work is "Taken chiefly from the manuscript of a very ingenious gen- tleman, deceased, and adapted, etc.," seem, therefore, a pure fiction, very cus- tomary at that time. Meyer," Berlin, 1881, I. The exchange of products, of the different materials in which the labour of society is embodied, forms here the basis of the movement. Hence the diminution in incomes between £60 and £100 in Table E. 3 I. I give, in conclusion, a comparative table of Mr. Redgrave's, on the average number of spindles per factory and per spinner in the different countries of Europe. of cotton be requisite to spin 1 lb. m., the manufacturers only had to give them no work till 2 in the afternoon; they could then keep them in the factory without intermission till 8.30 in the evening. H. Quantity Exported, 1860. The apparently single process is in reality a double one. Econ.," 3 Ed. Lond. The tool, as we have seen, is not extermi- nated by the machine. 579 CHAPTER XXIV CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO CAPITAL SECTION 1.— CAPITALIST PRODUCTION ON A PROGRESSIVELY INCREASING SCALE. 417.) Macaulay might have reported- fur- ther that "extremely well-disposed" amis du commerce in the 17th century, narrate with "exultation" how in a poorhouse in Holland a child of four was employed, and that this example of "vertu mise en pratique" passes muster in all the humanitarian works, a la Macaulay, -to the time of Adam Smith. In the treatises, there- fore, of economists of the stamp of MacCulloch, Ure, Senior, and tutti quanti, we may read upon one page, that the labourer owes a debt of gratitude to capital for developing his productiveness, because the necessary labour-time is thereby shortened, and on the next page, that he must prove his gratitude by working in future for 15 hours instead of 10. he would believe almost anything they said. 17. ^ : . of yarn the labour of five days, of which four days are due to the cotton and the lost steel of the spindle, the remaining day having been absorbed by the cotton during the spinning process. 1 Other ways in which machinery affects the production of raw material will be mentioned in the third book. The first consolation neu- tralises the second. Historically, however, this form is developed in opposition to peasant agriculture and to the carry- ing on of independent handicrafts whether in guilds or not. An office was set up in Manchester, to which lists were sent of those workpeople in the agricultural districts wanting employ- ment, and their names were registered in books. Longe's Report. Londres, 1769. c, p. Both circuits are resolvable into the same two antithetical phases, C— M, a sale, and M— C, a purchase. The cots with one bedroom shel- tered 3 adults and 3 children, a married couple with 6 children, &c. London 1868; Vol. Besides the general pe- riodic changes of the industrial cycle, and the special fluctuations in the markets to which each industry is subject, we may also reckon what is called "the season," dependent either on the peri- odicity of favourable seasons of the year for navigation; or on fashion, and the sudden placing of large orders that have to be exe- cuted in the shortest possible time. The organisation of each group is based on division of labour, but the bond between the different groups is simple co-operation, which, by using in common one of the means of production, the furnace, causes it to be more economically con- sumed. Certain spheres of production demand, even at the very outset of capitalist production, a minimum of capital that is not as yet found in the hands of single individuals. During the second period of the labour-process, that in which his labour is no longer necessary labour, the workman, it is true, labours, expends labour-power; but his labour, being no longer necessary labour, he creates no value for himself. Assume the habitual working-day as 12 hours, the daily value of labour-power as 3s., the expression in money of a value that embodies 6 hours of labour. 13, 53, 59, etc. 4 qs. By this absorption it is in fact changed into yarn, because it is spun, because labour-power in the form of spinning is added to it; but the product, the yarn, is now nothing more than a measure of the labour absorbed by the cotton. As in the natural body head and hand wait upon each other, so the labour-process unites the labour of the hand with that of the head. 31-37, passim.) It is well known that in Eastern Europe as well as in Asia, English companies have undertaken the construction of railways, and have, in making them, employed side by side with the native labourers, a certain number of English working-men. The Manuscript is entitled: "The character and behaviour of King William, Sun- derland, etc., as represented in Original Letters to the Duke of Shrewsbury from Somers Halifax, Oxford, Secretary Vernon, etc." It is full of curiosa. The possessor of money does find on the market such a special com- modity in capacity for labour or labour-power. MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OP COMMODITIES 121 Just as the currency of money, generally considered, is but a reflex of the circulation of commodities, or of the antithetical metamorphoses they undergo, so, too, the velocity of that cur- rency reflects the rapidity with which commodities change their forms, the continued interlacing of one series of metamorphoses with another, the hurried social interchange of matter, the rapid disappearance of commodities from the sphere of circulation, and the equally rapid substitution of fresh ones in their places. There is in the district almost sufficient work to give to all partial employment if fairly dis- tributed. ... 3 When Anacharsis was asked for what purposes the Greeks used mon- ey, he replied, "For reckoning." (Athen. But at the same time, whilst his labour produces wealth, that wealth would, were he called on to consume it himself, make him less fit for labour." According to him, "men" [i.e., non-workers] "would probably prefer to do without all artistic perfection, and all the enjoyments that manufacturers procure for us, if it were necessary that all should buy them by constant toil like that of the labourer. It will be remembered that the year 1857 brought one of the great 1 i. Hence, e.g., in 1860 a great strike among the ribbon-weavers of Coventry. It can spring into life, only when the owner of the means of production and subsistence meets in the market with the free labourer selling his labour-power. — F.E.] MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 505 the labourers is more intense, and finds less resistance, as we shall see later in detail. Even apart from this disproportion, the mere comparison of the rate of wages expressed in gold would give a result far from accurate. What silly tautology results from the attempt to represent the capitalistic limits of the labour-fund as its natural and social limits may be seen, e.g., in Professor Fawcett. As the earth is his original larder, so too it is his original tool house. of linen =1 coat, already pro- pounds the riddle of the equivalent form for our solution. No doubt the answer is already anticipated in the price of the article, in the exponent of the magnitude of its value. 125, 126.) 1 Japan, with its purely feudal organisation of landed property and its developed petite culture, gives a much truer picture of the European middle ages than all our history books, dictated as these are, for the most part, by bourgeois prejudices. The production of absolute surplus-value turns exclusively upon the length of the working-day; the production of relative surplus-value, revolutionises out and out the technical processes of labour, and the composition of society. III., pp 268-271, passim.) 3 Wakefield, .1 c, Vol. The Cereal Crops include wheaX, oats, barley, rye, beans, and peas; the Green Crops, pota- toes, turnips, mangolds, beet-root, cabbages, carrots, parsnips, vetches, &c. of (nsp. 35. I have not been in bed since the night before last. In this work, Malthus finally discovers, with the help of Sismondi, the beauti- ful Trinity of capitalistic production: over-production, over-popula- tion, over-consumption — three very delicate monsters, indeed. The Hours of Labour Regulation Act, passed on August 17, 1867, regulates the smaller workshops and the so-called domestic industries. The law of exchange requires equality only between the ex- change-values of the commodities given in exchange for one another. In fact, ce n'est que le premier pas qui coute. To effect this transformation, in fact, a certain minimum of money or of exchange-value must be pre-sup- posed in the hands of the individual possessor of money or commodi- ties. If on the one hand the process be not carried beyond the point, where the value paid by the capitalist for the labour-power is replaced by an exact equivalent, it is simply a process of producing value; if, on the other hand, it be continued beyond that point, it be- comes a process of creating surplus-value. 1 Soon, however, this command over abnormal quantities of unpaid labour, i.e., quantities in ex- cess of the average social amount, becomes a source of competition amongst the capitalists themselves. 39.) "Money is but the fat of the Body Politick, whereof too much doth as oiten hinder its agility, as too little makes it sick ... and especially since the introduction of the new Poor Laws, begins again in the sixties, until it becomes finally epoch-making in 1872. So long as handicraft and manufacture form the general groundwork of social production, the subjection of the producer to one branch exclusively, the breaking up of the multifariousness of his employment, 3 is a necessary step in the development. We Christians, however, hold them in such honour, that we fairly worship them for the sake of their money ... 77. The weekly average of meat (bacon, etc.) varied from 1-r ounces for the silk- weavers, to I8-7- ounces for the kid-glovers; total average for the different categories 13.6 ounces. Hence, in comparison with the independent handicraft, more is produced in a given time, or the productive power of labour is increased. As with the division of labour in the interior of the manu- facturing workshops, so it is with the division of labour in the interior of society. So soon as it monopolises this position in the expres- sion of value for the world of commodities, it becomes the money commodity, and then, and not till then, does form D become dis- tinct from form C, and the general form of value become changed into the money-form. Econ." edit. 1 These historical causes convert the separation of the money- name from the weight-name into an established habit with the community. 2 worth of cotton spun, and 2-~- lbs. La societe veut-elle 'eliminer tous les inconvenients,' qui la travaillent, eh bien! qu'elle elimine les termes malsonnant, qu'elle change de langage, et pour cela elle n'a qu'a s'adresser a l'Academie pour lui demander une nouvelle edition de son dictionnaire." (Karl Marx, "Misere de la Philosophic," pp. 1073.) And yet they are not satisfied! VI. 302 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION The bargain concluded, it is discovered that he was no "free agent," that the time for which he is free to sell his labour-power is the time for which he is forced to sell it, 1 that in fact the vampire will not lose its hold on him "so long as there is a muscle, a nerve, a drop of blood to be exploited." 2 For "protection" against "the ser- pent of their agonies," the labourers must put their heads together, and, as a class, compel tne passing of a law, an all-powerful social barrier that shall prevent the very workers from selling, by voluntary contract with capital, themselves and their fam- ilies into slavery and death. If, therefore, in our historical sketch, on the one hand, modern industry; on the other, the labour of those who are physically and legally minors, play important parts, the former was to us only a special department, and the latte,r only a special- ly striking example of labour exploitation. As a general result it was found that "in only one of the ex- amined classes of in-door operatives did the average nitrogen- 1 A peculiar light is thrown on the advance made since the time of Adam Smith, by the fact that by him the word "workhouse" is still occasion- ally used as synonymous with "manufactory"; e.g., the opening of his chap- ter on the division of labour; "those employed in every different branch of the work can often be collected into the same workhouse." THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 655 supply just exceed, while in another it nearly reached, the esti- mated standard of bare sufficiency [i.e., sufficient to avert star- vation diseases], and that in two classes there was defect — in one, a very large defect — of both nitrogen and carbon. What be- comes of the production of wage-labourers, supernumerary in proportion to the accumulation of capital? m. Vanderlint, not to mention others. For the sake, therefore, of public morals, of bringing up an orderly population, and of giving the great body of the people a reasonable enjoyment of life, it is much to be desired that in all trades some portion of every working-day should be reserved for rest and leisure." (Leonard Horner in "Reports of Insp. From brighter, but exceptional scenes, it is requisite in the interests of justice, that attention should again be drawn to the overwhelming preponderance of facts which are a reproach to the civilisation of England. That is the consequence of the increasing productivity of labour. But the number of operatives was, in 1856, 56,131; in 1862, 52,429. For example, suppose a shoemaker, with given tools, makes in one working-day of twelve hours, one pair of boots. 4 The price of the necessary means of subsistence is therefore fully twice, and that of clothing exactly twice, as much as they were 20 years before. Mill's Evidence. Have not the English boasted of the in- genuity and dexterity of her working artists and manufacturers which have heretofore given credit and reputation to British wares in general? With regard to our weaver, the life of his com- modity ends with the Bible, into which he has reconverted his £2. 15,160 . CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO CAPITAL 601 both in France and in Holland." 1 Twenty years later, an Ameri- can humbug, the baronised Yankee, Benjamin Thompson (alias Count Rumford) followed the same line of philanthropy to the great satisfaction of God and man. In this inquiry the members of the committee themselves are the cross-exam- iners, and among them are to be found both mine-owners and mine exploiters; the witnesses are mostly working coal miners. Thus, we find the manufacture of flint glass combined with that of glass cutting and brass founding; the latter for the metal settings of va- rious articles of glass. c, p. If, with the mass of the popu- lation, that of the means of production employed in agri- culture also diminished, the mass of the capital employed in agriculture increased, because a part of the means of production that were formerly scattered, was concentrated and turned into capital. On the contrary, their value is expressed in its value. The military standard in Saxony was in 1780, 178 c. 2 For the farmer there is no more ingenious method of keeping his labourers well below the normal level, and yet of always having an extra hand ready for extra work, of ex- tracting the greatest possible amount of labour with the least possible amount of money, 3 and of making adult male labour "redundant." From the exposition already made, it will be under- stood why, on the one hand, a greater or less lack of employment for the agricultural labourer is admitted, while on the other, the gang-system is at the same time declared "necessary" on account of the want of adult male labour and its migration to the towns. The official list of paupers numbered in England 2 851,369 persons; in 1856, 877,767; in 1865, 971,433. Tuckett: "A History of the Past and Present State of the La- bouring Population." Lond. The concluding statement in this quotation refers exclusively to shoemaking. Everywhere the increased scale of industrial establishments is the starting-point for a more comprehensive organisation of the collective work of many, for a wider development of their material motive forces — in other words, for the progressive transformation of isolated processes of production, carried on by customary methods, into processes of production socially combined and scientifically ar- ranged. Three at the least out of every seven horses used on tillage land during the year can be dispensed with by using steam-power, at an expense not greater than that which, the horses dispensed with, would cost during the 3 or 4 months in which alone they can be used effectively. The material wear and tear of a machine is of two kinds. The original researches of Mr. J. 3 No wonder that in some parts of Lancashire a kind of famine fever broke out. Dr. Lee, Medical Officer of Health for Manchester, stated "that the average age at death of the Manchester . As early as 1846. • I. What do these people want, who cry out for money? How then can the spinner produce in one hour> in the shape of yarn, a value that embodies 5^- hours' labour? ! As a matter of fact, every machine is a combination of those simple powers, no matter how they may be disguised. 1 H. m., 15 40 minutes. 903.) 8 Condillac: "Le Commerce et le Gouvernement" (1776). 34. Peel (father of the "minis- ter of plausibility"), brought in his bill for the protection of children, in 1815, Francis Horner, lumen of the Bullion Committee and intimate friend of Ricardo, said in the House of Commons: "It is notorious, that with a bank- rupt's effects, a gang, if he might use the word, of these children had been put up to sale, and were advertised publicly as part of the property. At eight we go home. of Fact." MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 491 'This,' they naturally say, 'is an unjustice and loss to us, as it exhausts a portion of the boy's strength, of which we ought to have the full benefit.'" 1 Mr. J. 2 The insufficiency of food among the agricultural labourers, fell, as a rule, chiefly on the women and children, for "the man must eat to do his work." Still greater penury ravaged the town-workers examined. The changed form of the commodity is thus pre- vented from functioning as its unconditionally alienable form, or as its merely transient money-form. lis ressemblent en ceci aux theologiens, qui eux aussi etablissent deux sortes de religions. Suppose, also, that he discharges 50 of his workmen, and employs the remaining 50 with machinery that costs him £1,500. Manufacture proper not only subjects the previously in- dependent workman to the discipline and command of capital, but, in addition, creates a hierarchic gradation of the workmen them- selves. This is the case if the individual labourer yields more labour, and therefore his wages increase, and this although the price of labour remains the same or even falls, only more slowly than the mass of labour rises. . Blanqui." M. 39.) [The English language has the advantage of possessing different words for the two aspects of labour here considered. I have four horsemen lodging about. If now, the £110 be spent as money, they cease to play their part. None are included in the 1,208,648 who do not serve in private houses. In the latter, he belongs to himself, and performs his necessary vital functions outside the process of production. This is seen in a striking manner when they treat of banking, where the com- monplace definitions of money will no longer hold water. 28.) In English writers of the 17th century we frequently find "worth" in the sense of value in use, and "value" in the sense of exchange-value. But though the Factory Acts thus artificially ripen the material elements necessary for the con- version of the manufacturing system into the factory system, yet at the same time, owing to the necessity they impose for greater outlay of capital, they hasten on the decline of the small masters, and the concentration of capital. of Insp. G. Bedroom: 8 ft. This compulsory action of the State can take effect only within that inner sphere of circulation which is co-terminous with the terri- tories of the community, but it is also only within that sphere that money completely responds to its function of being the cir^ culating medium, or becomes coin. THE RATE OF SURPLUS-VALUE 223 To split up in this manner the product into different parts, of which one represents only the labour previously spent on the means of production, or the constant capital, another, only the necessary labour spent during the process of production, or the variable capital, and another and last part, only the surplus- labour expended during the same process, or the surplus-value; to do this, is, as will be seen later on from its application to complicated and hitherto unsolved problems, no less important than it is simple. But a usurer and money-glutton ? The beautiful and romantic valleys of Derbyshire, Not- tinghamshire and Lancashire, secluded from the public eye, became the dismal solitudes of torture, and of many a murder. to 8s.; in Dorsetshire from 7s. (Man himself, viewed as the impersonation of labour- power, is a natural object, a thing, although a. Comm., V. But what is the cost of production — of the labourer, i.e., the cost of producing or reproducing the labourer himself? The complete metamorphosis of a commodity, in its simplest form, implies four extremes, and three dramatis personae. ... In agri- culture as in manufacture, the transformation of production under the sway of capital, means, at the same time, the martyr- dom of the producer; the instrument of labour becomes the means of enslaving, exploiting, and impoverishing the labourer; the social combination and organisation of labour-processes is turned into an organised mode of crushing out the workman's individual vitality, freedom, and independence. . This result becomes inevitable from the moment there is a free sale, by the labourer himself, of labour-power as a commodity. Whence this di (Terence in their values? The incredible adulteration of bread, especially in London, was first revealed by the House of Commons Committee "on the adulteration of articles of food" (1855-56), and Dr. Has- sall's work, "Adulterations detected." 2 The consequence of these revelations was the Act of August 6th, 1860, "for preventing the adulteration of articles of food and drink," an inoperative law, as it naturally shows the tenderest consideration for every Free- trader who determines by the buying or selling of adulterated commodities "to turn an honest penny." 3 The Committee itself formulated more or less naively its conviction that Free-trade meant essentially trade with adulterated, or as the English in- 1 I. makes long hours of work desirable." With the increased use of machinery, &c, "the motives to long hours of work will become greater, as the only means by which a large proportion of fixed capital can be made profitable." (1. 140. 1858 1861 1868 England and Wales 25,818,576 28,352,152 30,478,228 Scotland 2,041,129 1,915,398 1,397,546 Ireland 150,512 119,944 124,240 United Kingdom .... . Assume that b' — b in the line a b' b c is equal to half of b c a b' — b c or to one hour's labour-time. And yet, you believe that the production of wealth, which arises from the labour of the workpeople, consists in the augmentation of the exchange-value of their products." 1 The shortening of the working-day is, therefore, by no means what is aimed at, in capitalist production, when labour is econo- mised by increasing its productiveness. that the ordinary agricultural la- bourers in Scotland very seldom get any meat at all." Answer No. 3047. Whatever the value of labour- power may be, whether the working-time necessary for the main- tenance of the labourer is 2 or 10 hours, the total value that a la- bourer can produce, day in, day out, is always less than the value in which 24 hours of labour are embodied, less than 12s., if 12s. But their form, too, once definitely settled by experience, petrifies, as is proved by their being in many cases handed down in the same form by one generation to another during thousands of years. 1821-1831 1.446 „ 1831-1841 1.326 „ 1841-1851 1.216 „ 1851-1861 1.141 „ Let us now, on the other hand, consider the increase of wealth. The history of the regulation of the working-day in certain branches of production, and the struggle still going on in others in regard to this regulation, prove conclusively that the isolated labourer, the labourer as "free" vendor of his la- bour-power, when capitalist production has once attained a cer- tain stage, succumbs without any power of resistance. The value of a day's labour-power, is, as will be remembered, estimated from its normal average duration, or from the normal duration of life among the labourers, and from corresponding normal transformations of organised bodily matter into motion, x in conformity with the nature of man. would suit us (!) very well, but the factory hours, 6 a. See 1. constitute probably four-fifths of the workers in the factories." "Report of Insp of Fact., 30th April, 1858." 4 "The productive power of his spinning-machine is accurately meas- ured, and the rate of pay for work done with it decreases with, though not 558 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION purely nominal, leads to constant battles between capitalist and labour. On the other hand, the retardation of the currency reflects the separation of these two processes into isolated antithetical phases, reflects the stagnation in the change of form, and therefore, in the social interchange of matter. 3 I. One motive mechanism was now able to drive many machines at once. The profits of manufacturers were enormous; but this only whetted the appetite that it should have satisfied, and therefore the man- ufacturers had recourse to an expedient that seemed to secure to them those profits without any possibility of limit; they began the practice of what is termed "night-working," that is, having tired one set of hands, by working them throughout the day, they had another set ready to go on working throughout the night; the day-set getting into the beds that the night-set had just quit- ted, and in their turn again, the night-set getting into the beds that the day-set quitted in the morning. 893.) CONSTANT CAPITAL AND VARIABLE CAPITAL 211 In the latter case we have an enormous increase in the constant capital, that is represented by the total value of the means of production used, and at the same time a great reduction in the variable capital, invested in labour-power. 2 1 The total area includes also peat, bogs, and waste land. 424 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION is elaborated into a complete system in the factory, and which fully develops the before mentioned labour of overlooking, thereby dividing the workpeople into operatives and overlookers, into private soldiers and sergeants of an industrial army. Therefore, according as A is placed in relation with one or the other, we get for one and the same commodity, different elementary expressions of value. He has made the important discovery that if, on the one hand, the formation of surplus-value, or surplus-produce, and the consequent accumulation of cap- ital, is now-a-days due to the thrift of the capitalist, on the other hand, in the lowest stages of civilisation it is the strong who compel the weak to econ- omise. There are, however, states of society in which one and the same man does tailoring and weaving alternately, in which case these two forms of labour are mere modifications of the labour of the same indi- vidual, and no special and fixed functions of different persons; just as the coat which our tailor makes one day, and the trousers which he makes another day, imply only a variation in the labour of one and the same individual. Blanqui the economist, not the Revolu- tionist, had been entrusted by the Government with an inquiry into the condition of the working-class. i, art. Hence, with- in certain limits what is lost by shortening the duration is gained by the increasing tension of labour-power. Nevertheless, one commodity infects another through their common value-relation, so that their prices, expressed in gold or in silver, gradually settle down into the proportions determined by their comparative values, until finally the values of all commodities are estimated in terms of the new value of the metal that constitutes money. 9. Classical economy is therefore quite right, when it maintains that the consumption of surplus-products by productive, instead of by unproductive labour- ers, is a characteristic feature of the process of accumulation. The determination of the price of labour by: daily value of labour-pow er working-day of a given number of hours ' shows that a mere prolongation of the working-day lowers the price of labour, if no compensation steps in. The producer of a particular commodity has that one article alone to offer; this he sells very often in large quantities, but his many and various wants compel him to split up the price realised, the sum of money set free, into numerous purchases. le mestier, le fait, l'etat, la provision et toute l'ordonnance des monnaies, de donner tel cours, et pour tel prix comme il nous plait et bon nous semble." It was a maxim of the Roman Law that the value of money was fixed by decree of the emperor. Say answers: "Quant a la difficulte qu'eleve Mr. Ricardo en disant que, par des procedes mieux entendus un million de personnes peuvent produire deux fois, trois fois autant de richesses, sans produire plus de valeurs, cette difficulte n'est pas une lorsque Ton considere, ainsi qu'on le doit, la production comme un echange dans le- quel on donne les services productifs de son travail, de sa terre, et de ses capitaux, pour obtenir des produits. . What, on the other hand, characterises division of labour in manufactures? The effect is the same as if each individual weaver had expended more labour-time upon his particular product than is socially necessary. At that time, therefore, division of labour and co-operation in the workshops, were viewed more from the positive aspect, that they made the 1 In old-fashioned manufactures the revolts of the workpeople against machinery, even to this day, occasionally assume a savage character, as in the case of the Sheffield file cutters in 1865. 22. The result is not the return of the money, but its continued removal further and further away from its starting- 1 See my observations on James Mill in "Zur Kritik, &c," pp. Is not the real interest of the nation similar? ggO CAPITALIST PRODUCTION goods on their backs, without any resting place but the work- house." 1 The workhouses are already over-crowded, and the "im- provements" already sanctioned by Parliament are only just begun. So soon as it shall happen that the children of the manufacturers themselves have to go through a course of schooling as helpers in the mill, this almost unexplored territory of mechanics will soon make remarkable progress. He develops his slumbering powers and compels them to act in obedience to his sway, We are not now dealing 178 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION with those primitive instinctive forms of labour that remind us of the mere animal. 344 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION through a series of processes step by step, like the wire in the manu- facture of needles, which passes through the hands of 72 and sometimes even 92 different detail workmen. These facts manifest themselves at first by products as a general rule taking the form of commodities. 2 From the motley crowd of labourers of all callings, ages, sexes, that press on us more busily than the souls of the slain on Ulysses, on whom — without referring to the Blue books under their arms — we see at a glance the mark of over-work, let us take two more figures whose striking contrast proves that before capital all men are alike— a milliner and a blacksmith. See Rouard de Card, "On the Falsifications of the Materials of the Sacrament." ("De la falsification des substances sacramentelles," Paris, 1856.) 2 "Report, &c, relative to the grievances complained of by the jour- neymen bakers, &c, London, 1862," and "Second Report, &c, London, 1863." 250 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION the dough is 'made'; and with a sack under him, and another rolled up as a pillow, he sleeps for about a couple of hours. Now listen how those com- modities speak through the mouth of the economist. It is not called into use by a scarcity of men, but by the facility with which they can be brought to work in masses." (Piercy Ravenstone: "Thoughts on the Funding System and its Effects." London, 1824, p. The continual re-transformation of surplus-value into capital now appears in the shape of the increas- ing magnitude of the capital that enters into the process of pro- duction. 249.) THE WORKING-DAY 263 well, but — " But Messrs. 122. Our capitalist, who is at home in his vulgar economy, ex- claims: "Oh! but I advanced my money for the express purpose of making more money." The way to Hell is paved with good inten- tions, and he might just as easily have intended to make money, without producing at all. In the year 1865, the same factories contained, looms 95,163, spindles 7,025,031, had a steam-power of 28,925 horses, and a water-power of 1,445 horses, and employed 88,913 persons. of Fact.," 30th April, 1860, p. c, p. Education. When one of our people leaves the mill, he renders useless a capital that has cost £100,000." * Only fancy! making "useless" for a single moment, a capital that has cost £100,000! It is, in truth, monstrous, that a single one of our people should ever leave the factory! The in- creased use of machinery, as Senior after the instruction he received from Ashworth clearly perceives, makes a constantly increasing lengthening of the working-day "desirable." 2 Machinery produces relative surplus-value; not only by di- rectly depreciating the value of labour-power, and by indirectly cheapening the same through cheapening the commodities that enter into its reproduction, but also, when it is first introduced sporadically into an industry, by converting the labour employed by the owner of that machinery, into labour of a higher degree and greater efficacy, by raising the social value of the article produced above its individual value, and thus enabling the capitalist to replace the value of a day's labour-power by a smaller portion of the value of a day's product. Were they not both heavy, they could not enter into this relation, and the one could therefore not serve as the expression of the weight of the other. 674. A beautiful mode of motion this for developed capitalist production! Before, in consequence of the rise of wages, any positive increase of the population really fit for work could occur, the time would have been passed again and again, during 638 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION which the industrial campaign must have been carried through, the battle fought and won. Dr. Embleton, of the Newcastle Fever Hospital, says: "There can be little doubt that the great cause of the continuance and spread of the typhus has been the over-crowding of human beings, and the uncleanliness of their dwellings. 3 SECTION 2.— ERRONEOUS CONCEPTION, BY POLITICAL ECONOMY, OF REPRODUCTION ON A PROGRESSIVELY INCREASING SCALE Before we further investigate accumulation or the reconver- sion of surplus-value into capital, we must brush on one side an ambiguity introduced by the classical economists. Such a revolution, however, alters only the quantitative relation between the con- stant and the variable capital, or the proportions in which the total capital is split up into its constant and variable constituents; it has not in the least degree affected the essential difference be- tween the two. If only a part, say one half, were consumed, the same result would follow at the end of 10 years, since 10 x£l00 =£1,000. 1 Therefore, he makes up his mind to part with it for com- modities whose value in use is of service to him. of Fact. "Open villages," those whose soil belongs to many smaller landlords. d'Et Dumont, 3eme edit. Under the ideal measure of values there lurks the hard cash. Labour-power exists only as a capacity, or power of the living individual. But tailoring and weaving are, qualitatively, different kinds of labour. m. It is a matter of course, that all this is applicable to the simple circulation of commodities alone, the only form that we are now considering. 12, 13. These idyllic proceedings are the chief momenta of primitive accumulation. of tea = ] 40 lbs. Clothing Total. Whilst on one side of the wall, the land calls for labour, on the other side the defrauded labourers are casting at it longing glances. Therefore, it claimed and obtained the enjoyment not only of making children of 8 drudge without intermission from 2 to 8.30 p. If the old cotton had never been spun, it could, after the rise, be resold at a shilling a pound instead of at sixpence. Classical economy, although not formulating the law, holds instinctively to it, because it is a necessary conse- quence of the general law of value. THE WORKING-DAY 241 "Five minutes a day's increased work, multiplied by weeks, are equal to two and a half days of produce in the year." 1 "An additional hour a day gained by small instalments be- fore 6 a. 2 Malthus, "Principles of Political Economy/' pp. "Although," says Mr. Redgrave, "I have given the actual earnings of the operatives in the several mills, it does not follow that they earn the same amount week by week. The nature of such wants, whether, for instance, they spring from the stomach or from fancy, makes no differ- ence. 2 "Rep of Insp of Fact, for 31st October, 1856," pp. And this one historical condition comprises a world's history. Even on princely estates .... The circumstance, that on the one hand the daily sustenance of labour-power costs only half a day's labour, while on the other hand the very same labour-power can work during a whole day, that consequently the value which its use during one day creates, is double what he pays for that use, this circumstance is, without doubt, a piece of good luck for the buyer, but by no means an injury to the seller. to 7 p. On the other hand, implements, in regard to which man has always acted as a simple motive power, as, for instance, 1 It is only during the last 15 years (i.e., since about 1850), that a constantly increasing portion of these machine tools have been made in England by machinery, and that not by the same manufacturers who make the machines. Messrs. and 2s. Many boys having attended school for the required number of hours, when they return to school after the expiration of their six months' work in the print work, are in the same condition as when they first attended school as print-work boys, that they have lost all they gained by their previous school attendance. c, c. xxv., n, 162, and II. Lady Orkney's endearing offices are supposed to have been — fceda labiorum ministerial (In the Sloane Manuscript Collection, at the British Museum, No. 4224. Captain Parry says of the inhabitants on the west coast of Baffin's Bay: "In this case (he refers to barter) they licked it (the thing represented to them) twice to their tongues, after which they seemed to consider the bargain satisfac- torily concluded." In the same way, the Eastern Esquimaux licked the articles they received in exchange. Exchange-value, at first sight, presents itself as a quantita- tive relation, as the proportion in which values in use of one sort are exchanged for those of another sort, 3 a relation constantly changing with time and place. The commodities are equated beforehand in im- agination, by their prices, to definite quantities of money. They entered as separate commodities into the umbrella manufactory, where they were fitted together. 2,015,237,851 lbs. though it is evidently not on account of being net." (Th. Hopkins, "On Rent of Land, &c." London, 1828, p. c, p. 51, 52, 58, 59, 62, 70, of the Appendix. of yarn is nothing more than so much cotton and spindle- waste in disguise. 17 8 These are the net incomes after certain legally authorised abatements. "He" (the man out of work) "may be told the supply of cotton- workers is too large .... On the other hand, he desires to realise the value of his commodity, to convert it into any other suitable commodity of equal value, irrespective of whether his own commodity has or has not any use-value for the owner of the other. Smith. 231, note.) 3 "II a fallu convenir (a new edition of the contrat social!) que toutes les fois qu'il echangerait du travail fait contre du travail a faire, le dernier (le capitaliste) aurait une valeur superieure au premier" (le travailleur). (6) Farms over 50, not over 100 acres. produces a mass of surplus-value of 3s., or the labourer supplies daily a mass of surplus-labour equal to 6 hours. We have shown that the surplus-value produced by a given capital is equal to the surplus-value produced by each workman multiplied by the number of workmen simultaneously employed. In this coun- ty, the farmer, contrary to the custom elsewhere, rents only such farms as have on them labourers' cottages. That this same labour is, on the other hand, the universal value-creating element, and thus possesses a property by 1 The Morning Star, a London Free-trade organ,, naif to silliness, protested again and again during the American Civil War, with all the moral indignation of which man is capable, that the negro in the "Confederate States" worked absolutely for nothing. 11 by 6 ft. By a social contract of a quite original kind. ' "'Though I signed it [the petition], I said at the time I was putting my hand to a wrong thing.' 'Then why did you put your hand to it?' 'Because I should have been turned off if I had refused.' Whence it would appear that this petitioner felt himself 'oppressed,' but not exactly by the Factory Act." I. The men are now obliged to seek work of the neighbouring farmers and are only hired by the day, and therefore under the most precarious form of wage. The price at which they buy their wages was shown on an earlier page. 2 "Fourth Report, &c, of Inland Revenue." Lond., 1860, p. 70, 71. c, p. Hence, the conditions of production, i. 649.) "There is a peculiarity of dress?" "Yes ... THE WORKING-DAY 251 bread. c, p. The life of myriads of workmen and work- women is now uselessly tortured and shortened by the never- ending physical suffering that their mere occupation begets." 1 In illustration of the way in which the workrooms influence the state of health Dr. Simon gives the following table of mortality. E.g., with the division of labour in manufacture, and with the use of machinery, more raw material is worked up in the same time, and, therefore, a greater mass of raw material and auxiliary sub- stances enter into the labour-process. . . A mer- 1 Lieut. But that is not all. Some of the farm- ers declare that the cots are "a great nuisance here, because they bring the poor." On the statement of one gentleman: "The poor are none the better for them; if you build 500 they will let fast enough, in fact, the more you build, the more they want" (according to him the houses give birth to the inhabitants, 692 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION who then by a law of Nature press on "the means of housing"). A remark of Mr. Redgrave to be quoted directly seems strange, especially if we consider that even among the years of prosperity of the English cotton trade, the year 1860 stands un- paralleled, and that, besides, wages were exceptionally high For this ex- traordinary demand for work had to contend with the depopulation of Ireland, with unexampled emigration from the English and Scotch agricul- tural districts to Australia and America, with an actual diminution of the population in some of the English agricultural districts, in consequence partly of an actual breakdown of the vital force of the labourers, partly of the already effected dispersion of the disposable population through the dealers in human flesh. The owner of labour-power is mortal. . "The lawsof commerce are the laws of Nature, and therefore the laws of God." (E. Objects in themselves are external to man, and consequently alienable by him. Now we know that the capitalist divides his capital into two parts. The yard was a great square place with an open shed running all round it, and several large heaps of snow covered the paving-stones in the middle. The rag-sorters are the medium for the spread of small-pox and other infectious diseases, and they themselves are the first victims. By this an end was put to the relay system once for all. Eden strongly recommends the Rumfordian beggar-soup to workhouse overseers, and reproachfully warns the English labourers that "many poor people, particularly in Scotland, live, and that very comfortably, for months together, upon oat-meal and barley-meal, mixed with only water and salt." (1. Coins of the same denomination become different in value, because they are different in weight. The mode of appropriation of the prod- ucts remains the same as before; it is in no way altered by the bargain we have mentioned. As before, he will use up the means of production 1 "When capital is employed in advancing to the workman his wages, it adds nothing to the funds for the maintenance of labour." (Cazenove in note to his edition of Malthus' "Definitions in Pol. But the movement 1 Destutt de Tracy, although, or perhaps because, he was a member of the Institute, held the opposite view. m. 2 Second. These cottages are seldom provided with gardens, but many of the inmates are able to farm small allotments at 10s. m., without any legal pause for meal-times. The titanic advance of production— the latter half of the 20 years' period again far surpassing the former— has been already pointed out sufficiently in Part IV. During the 14th century arose the farms or terriers. . "The town of Newcastle-on-Tyne," says Dr. Hunter, "contains a sample of the finest tribe of our countrymen, often sunk by external circum- stances of house and street into an almost savage degradation." 3 1 1. c, p. It is otherwise in the colonies. In the manufacture of paper-hangings the coarser sorts are printed by machine; the finer by hand (block-printing). In like manner, if the productiveness of his own labour varies by rising or falling, he will in one hour spin either more or less cotton, as the case may be, than he did before, and will consequently preserve in the product of one hour, more or less value of cotton; but, all the same, he will preserve by two hours' labour twice as much value as he will by one. xvi., n. Hence at the end of the 15th and during the whole of the 16th century, throughout Western Europe a bloody legislation against vagabondage. The whole body is paralysed if but one of its members be wanting. xix., xx., xxi. On the other hand, if the hours of working were reduced by one hour per day (prices remaining the same), the net profit would be destroyed— if they were reduced by one hour and a half, even the gross profit would be destroyed." 1 And the professor calls this an "analysis!" If, giving cre- dence to the out-cries of the manufacturers, he believed that the workmen spend the best part of the day in the production, i.e., the reproduction or replacement of the value of the build- ings, machinery, cotton, coal, &c, then his analysis was super- fluous. Why? In this aerial bleaching, drying-rooms were used at temperatures of from 90° to 100° Fahrenheit, in which the work was done for the most part by girls. 4 by 6 ft. In this case the mere maintenance of life would be the end of his production, not the increase of wealth; but this latter is implied in capitalist production. If it happens that a vagabond has been idling about for three days, he is to be taken to his birthplace, branded with a redhot iron with the letter V on the breast and be set to work, in chains, in the streets or at some other labour. — 'Avdfxr). 1774, in which work there is a special chapter entitled "Prices depend on quantity of money," at p. Let the two parts at starting be equal; 3 shillings value of labour-power, 3 shillings surplus-value. It is just nothing but a law of Nature, founded on the want of knowledge of those whose action is the subject of it." (Friedrich Engels: "Umrisse zu einer Kritik der Nationalokonomie," in the "Deutsch-Franzosische Jahrbucher," edited by Arnold Ruge and Karl Marx. Moreover, the capitalist gets rich, not like the miser, in proportion to his personal labour and restricted consumption, but at the same rate as he squeezes out the labour-power of others, and enforces on the labourer abstinence from all life's enjoyments. and II., we see that the same change of magnitude in relative value may arise from to- tally opposite causes. If, by converting the little farmers into a body of men who must work for others, more labour is produced, it is an advantage which the nation" (to which, of course, the "con- verted" ones do not belong) "should wish for. Thus, in 1835, the total number of operatives in the cotton, woollen, worsted, flax, and silk facto- ries of the United Kingdom was only 354,684; while in 1861 the number of the power-loom weavers alone (of both sexes and of all ages, from eight years upwards), amounted to 230,654. 3 1. 123.) "Would you call for the inter- ference of Parliament?" "I think that if anything effectual is to be done in the education of the colliers' children, it will have to be made compulsory by Act of Parliament." (n. Labour is, in the first place, a process in which both man and Nature participate, and in which man of his own accord starts, regulates, and controls the material re-actions between himself and Nature. 125, 126.) DIVISION OP LABOUR AND MANUFACTURE 353 ly-developed means of communication; and in this sense the North- ern States of the American Union, for instance, are more thickly populated than India. 64. 36.) 1 [Added in the 4th German edition.— The law of progressive diminu- tion of the relative magnitude of variable capital and its effect on the condi- tion of the class of wage-workers is conjectured rather than understood by some of the prominent economists of the classical school. The former applies to blast-furnaces, iron and copper mills, foundries, machine shops, metal manufactories, gutta-percha works, paper mills, glass-works, tobacco manufactories, letter- press printing (including newspapers), book-binding, in short to all industrial establishments of the above kind, in which 50 individuals or more are occupied simultaneously, and for not less than 100 days during the year. In those branches of industry in which the machinery system is first introduced, Manufacture itself furnishes, in a general way, the natural basis for the division, and consequent organisation, of the process of production. Written by Thomas Mun of London, merchant, and now published for the common good by his son John Mun." London, 1669, pp. Ill, 48. of cotton can be spun into 1 J- lbs, of yarn, then 190 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 10 lbs. commanded that the same individuals should always carry on the same trade, for he knew that they who change their occupations become skilled in none; but that those who constantly stick to one occupation bring it to the highest perfection. The only thing then that can render the labouring man industrious, is a moderate quan- tity of money, for as too little will, according as his temper is, either dispirit or make him desperate, so too much will make him insolent and lazy . A critical history of technology would show how little any of the inven- tions of the 18th century are the work of a single individual. The fact that the labourer consumes his means of subsistence for his own purposes, and not to please the capitalist, has no bearing on the matter. On the other hand, the quantitative proportion in which the articles are exchangeable, becomes dependent on their produc- tion itself. 80. In June, 1864, a man, his wife and 4 children lived in a cot (one-storied cottage). But in the great towns, where each can find many buyers, one trade is sufficient to maintain the man who carries it on. It is in Cuba, at this day, whose revenues are reckoned by millions, and whose planters are princes, that we see in the ser- vile class, the coarsest L.re, the most exhausting and unremit- ting toil, and even the absolute destruction of a portion of its numbers every year." 1 1 Cairnes, "The Slave Power," pp. The indefinite multiplication of the productive powers of labour can then only have for result the increase of luxury and enjoyment of the idle rich." 1 Finally Destutt de Tracy, the fish-blooded bourgeois doctri- naire, blurts out brutally: "In poor nations the people are comfor- table, in rich nations they are generally poor." 2 SECTION 5. c, pp. After this, one can judge of the good faith of the "execrable politi cal cant-monger," Edmund Burke, when he called the expression, "labouring poor,"— "execrable political cant." This sycophant who, in the pay of the Eng- lish oligarchy, played the romantic laudator temporis acti against the French Revolution, just as, in the pay of the North American Colonies, at the beginning of the American troubles, he had played the Liberal against the English oligarchy, was an out andout vulgar bourgeois. M. When a certain stage of development has been reached, a conventional degree of prodi- gality, which is also an exhibition of wealth, and consequently a source of credit, becomes a business necessity to the "unfortunate" capitalist. "On one occasion, on visiting a place called a school, from which certificates of school attendance had issued, I was so struck with the ignorance of the master, that I said to him: 'Pray, sir, can you read?' His reply was: 'Aye, sum- mat!' and as a justification of his right to grant certificates, he added: *At any rate, I am before my scholars.' The inspectors, when the Bill of 1844 was in preparation, did not fail to represent the disgraceful state of the places called schools, certificates from which they were obliged to admit as a compliance with the laws, but they were successful only in obtaining thus much, that since the passing of the Act of 1844, the figures in the school certificate must be filled up in the handwriting of the schoolmaster, who must also sign his Christian and surname in full." 2 Sir John Kin- caid, factory inspector for Scotland, relates experiences of the same kind. 2 Reports, &c, for 31st October, 1849, p. This I call the Fetishism which attaches itself to the products of labour, so soon as they are produced as commod- ities, and which is therefore inseparable from the production of commodities. simple con- trivance for promoting the accumulation of capital," which, of course, since the time of Adam, floated in their imagination as the sole and final end of their existence: "they have divided them- selves into owners of capital and owners of labour .... A violent interrup- tion of the labour-process by a crisis, makes him sensitively aware of it. They have introduced improved and new machinery of various kinds, which altogether supersedes the employment of children {i.e., under 13 years); f. . 718.) "Do you think that in this country any law that you pass . 134. "He feels clear," says Dr. 1 "In no particular have the rights of persons been so avowedly and shamefully sacrificed to the rights of proper ty as in regard to the lodging of the labouring class. 68.) This work appeared afterwards- as "Traite d'Econ. E. Pottery, as we saw, is one of the shortest-lived industries. The small, one-storied cots are often divided by partitions into two bedrooms, one bed frequently in a kitchen, 5 feet 6 inches in height. Lord Shaftesbury's Bill limited the hours of children's labour," &c. Its expropriating efficacy is still further heightened by the system of protection, which forms one of its integral parts. Under this head the following categories show the greatest increase: of 1864 over that increase of 1853 per year Houses, 38.60% 3.50% Quarries, 84.76o/ 7.70% Mines, 68.85% 6.26% Ironworks, 39.92% 3.63% Fisheries, 57.37% 5.21% Gasworks, 125.02% H.45% Railways, 83.29% 7.57%* If we compare the years from 1853 to 1864 in three sets of four consecutive years each, the rate of augmentation of the in- come increases constantly. A coat as such no more tells us it is value, than does the first piece of linen we take hold of. The most striking proof of this is afforded by the relays system, put into operation by the manufacturers during their revolt from 1848-1850. This repeated change of place of the same pieces of money corresponds to the double change in form of the commodities, to their motion in opposite directions through two stages of circulation, and to the inter- lacing of the metamorphoses of different commodities. a "Reports, &c, ior 31st Oct., 1846, " p. 1857.— 1 in 13. Justices of the peace in petty sessions are authorised to have them publicly whipped and for the first offence to imprison them for 6 months, for the second for 2 years. 17. Value Export- ed, 1860. . From 1851-1861, the number of holdings of 15 to 30 acres increased 61,000, that of holdings over 30 acres, 109,000, whilst the total number of all farms fell 120,000, a fall, therefore, solely due to the suppression of farms under 15 acres— i.e., to their cen- tralisation. . The greatest service was rendered here by John Barton, although he, like all the rest, lumps togeth- er constant and fixed capital, variable and circulating capital. There is, however, a second mode of acquiring things, to which we may by preference and with correctness give the name of Chre- matistic, and in this case there appear to be no limits to riches and posses- sions. Since all commodities are merely particular equivalents of money, the latter being their universal equivalent, they, with regard to the latter as the universal commodity, play the parts of particular commodities. Lastly the number of spindles increased by 1,612,541, while the number of opera- tives decreased by 50,505 The" temporary" misery, inflicted on the workpeople by the cotton-crisis, was heightened, and from being temporary made permanent, by the rapid and persistent progress of machinery. 46.) Mr. A. . The portion of his day's labour devoted to this purpose, will be greater or less, in proportion to the value of the necessaries that he daily requires on an average, or, what amounts to the same thing, in proportion to the labour-time required on an average to produce them. [Added in the 4th German edition. We get light work done by gangs." 1 The soil requires much light field labour, such as weeding, hoeing, certain processes of manur- ing, removing of stones, &c. There remain eight shillings, which are the expression in money, of the value newly created dur- ing the working-day. The masters began their revolt with the sim- ple declaration that the sections of the Act of 1844 which pro- hibited the ad libitum use of young persons and women in such short fractions of the day of 15 hours as the employer chose, were "comparatively harmless" so long as the work-time was fixed at 12 hours. Thus social power becomes the private power of private persons. * 1 "All things being equal, the English manufacturer can turn out a con- siderably larger amount of work in a given time than a foreign manufacturer, so much as to counterbalance the difference of the working-days, between 60 hours a week here, and 72 or 80 elsewhere." ("Rep. Answer: Undoubtedly; it would have superseded them much more than it has done, if the hand loom weavers were not enabled to submit to a reduction of wages.' 'Question: But in submitting he has accepted wages which are insufficient to support him, and looks to parochial contribution as the remainder of his support? Leonard Horner has shown in "A Letter to Mr. Senior," &c, London, 1837, that they are worth no more than the so-called "Analysis." Leonard Horner was one of the Factory Inquiry Commissioners in 1833, and Inspec- tor, or rather Censor of Factories till 1859. If in one hour l4 lbs. lib. The transition is very diffi- cult in those cases where the production of the article by manufac- ture consists, not of a series of graduated processes, but of a great number of disconnected ones. The boots have therefore more value than the leather, but the value of the leather remains what it was; it has not expanded it- self, has not, during the making of the boots, annexed surplus- value. Simple average labour, it is true, varies in character in different countries and at different times, but in a particular society it is given. That rent-rolls and profits can ever be "excessive," or that their plethora is in any way connected with plethora of the people's misery is, of course, an idea as "disrepu- table" as "unsound." He keeps to facts. c, t. By confounding these two distinct things some writers have been led to hold that the value of gold and silver is imaginary. . Sheep were introduced into glens which had been the seats of communities of small farmers; and the latter were driven to seek subsistence on coarser and more sterile tracks of soil. . The first effect of shortening the working-day results from the self-evident law, that the efficiency of labour-power is in an inverse ratio to the duration of its expenditure. The simple circulation of com- modities — selling in order to buy — is a means of carrying out a purpose unconnected with circulation, namely, the appropria- tion of use-values, the satisfaction of wants. Polit." Paris, 1847, pp. It is precisely among the workpeople of modern industry that we meet with the shortest duration of life. 1 This first current is started by the countries that exchange their labour, realised in commodities, for the labour embodied in the precious metals by gold and silver-producing countries. THE GENERAL LAW OP CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 639 why and wherefore of an absolute increase of workers accompa- nying an increase of wages, and of a diminution of wages accompa- nying an absolute increase of labourers. Human labour is therefore accumulated in it. The circulation itself, of course, gives no clue to the ori- gin of this stagnation; it merely puts in evidence the phenomenon itself. Then we have rate of surplus-value i-=|i^=100%. The history of the cotton famine is too characteristic to dis- pense with dwelling upon it for a moment. Oct., 1862," P- 19.) MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 407 working-day, the rate of surplus-value is determined by the rela- tive duration of the necessary labour and of the surplus-labour in a day. It is now 155. 2 1. . This occurs whenever the rise in the price of labour-power does not compensate for its in- creased wear and tear. l The net result is, that all owners of commodities sell their goods to one another at 10% above their value, which comes precisely to the same as if they sold them at their true value. This industry, according to the classification of the Children's Employment Commission, comprises straw-hat makers, ladies'-hat makers, cap-makers, tailors, milliners and dressmakers, shirt-makers, corset-makers, glove-makers, shoemakers, besides many minor branches, such as the making of neck-ties, collars, &c. Whenever therefore a product enters as a means of produc- tion into a new labour-process, it thereby loses its character of product, and becomes a mere factor in the process. It was no longer a question of obtaining from him a certain quantity of useful products. xv., n. It is of course understood that, by "Value of the Product," is meant only the value newly created in a working-day, the constant part of the value of the product being excluded. And vice versa, if the latter be given, and we require to find the surplus- value. 3 This is the official expression both in the factories and in the reports. for "young persons and women" only. an enormous amount of time is lost . . Years ago we were always able to work in the slack times, so as to meet the demand of the next season, but now no one can say beforehand what will be the demand then." 1 In those factories and manufactories that are not yet subject to the Factory Acts, the most fearful over-work prevails peri- odically during what is called the season, in consequence of sud- den orders. Hence the expression of the equivalence of a commodity with the sum of money constituting its price, is a tautology, 8 just as in general the expression of the relative value of a commodity is a statement of the equivalence of two commodities. The smaller the part of it which is required for the production of the necessary means of subsistence, so much the greater is the part that can be set to do other work. It requires but little racking of brains to comprehend that if one quarter of wheat costs £2, 100 quarters will cost £200, 200 quarters £400, and so on, that consequently the quantity of money that changes place with the wheat, when sold, must increase with the quantity of that wheat. .... One can walk from the Earl of Dal- housie's estates in Forfarshire to John o'Groats, without ever leaving forest land.... But if the necessary labour vanish, so too does the surplus-labour, since it is only a function of the for- m, .. The old, often-told story, 1 was once more recounted. As a producer of the activity of 1 The molecular theory of modern chemistry first scientifically worked out by Laurent and Gerhardt rests on no other law. . The custom was for the master to clothe his apprentices and to feed and lodge them in an "apprentice house" near the factory; overseers were appoint- ed to see to the works, whose interest it was to work the children to the utmost, because their pay was in proportion to the quantity of work that they could exact. The tendency of capital is there unmistakably; but the facts themselves are still as isolated as the phe- nomena of two-headed children. If the corn is not all eaten, but part of it also sown— abstinence of the capitalist. As measure of value, and as standard of price, money has two entirely distinct functions to perform. 720.) "Marked by whom?" "By his employers." (n. The large workshops, undertakings of certain private persons who pay labourers from day to day to work for their gain, may be able to put these private individuals at their ease, but they will never be an object worth the attention of governments. En tout genre de travail il doit arriver, et il arrive en effet, que le salaire de l'ouvrier se borne a ce qui lui est necessaire pour lui procurer sa subsistance." (Turgot, "Reflexions, &c," CEuvres, ed. White slave trade; 1835 great prosperity, con- temporaneous starvation of the hand-loom weavers; 1836 great prosperity; 1837 and 1838 depression and crisis; 1839 revival; 1840 great depression, riots, calling out of the military; 1841 and 1842 frightful suffering among the factory operatives; 1842 the manufacturers lock the hands out of the factories in order to en- force the repeal of the Corn Laws. Of these 23- 23rds (constituting the whole £115,000) twenty, that is to say £100,000 out of the £115,000, simply replace the capital;— one twenty-third (or £5,000 out of the £115,000) makes up for the de- terioration of the mill and machinery. If, however, the price of labour- power had fallen, not to Is. 6d., the lowest possible point con- sistent with its new value, but to 2s. I., p. c, pp. "Pecunias vero nulli einere fas erit, nam in usu publico constitutas oportet non esse mercem." Some good work on this question has been done by G. If the special productive labour of the workman were not spinning, he could not convert the cotton into yarn, and there- fore could not transfer the values of the cotton and spindle to the yarn. 19, 20.) In the year 1848, after the passing of the 10 hours' bill, the masters of some flax spinning mills, scattered, few and far between, over the country on the borders of Dorset and Somerset, foisted a petition against the bill on to the shoulders of a few of their workpeople. . It is the denomination and currency of the money that men regard in bargaining, and not the quantity of silver... MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 435 NUMBER OF POWER-LOOMS. 3, erroneously makes gold a mere symbol of value. The spinner has to pay something additional for juve- nile aid out of his additional sixpence, accompanied by displacing a portion of adults" (1. 1 In this way, during the manufacturing period, were developed the first scientific and technical elements of Modern Mechanical Industry. I have elsewhere examined thoroughly the Utopian idea of "labour-money" in a society founded on the production of commodities (1. If his work is defective in quality, the penalty falls on him, if less in quantity than the minimum fixed for a given time, he is dismissed and an abler operative procured." (Ure, I. Intensification of Labour The immoderate lengthening of the working-day, produced by machinery in the hands of capital, leads to a reaction on the part of society, the very sources of whose life are menaced; and, thence, to a normal working-day whose length is fixed by law. They scented some profit in it, and let the sea-shore to the great fishmongers of London. Rep. But, however important it may be to value, that it should have some object of utility to embody itself in, yet it is a matter of CONSTANT CAPITAL AND VARIABLE CAPITAL 203 complete indifference what particular object serves this purpose; this we saw when treating of the metamorphosis of commodities. But as it is phys- ically impossible to exploit the same individual labour-power constantly during the night as well as the day, to overcome this physical hindrance, an alternation becomes necessary between the workpeople whose powers are exhausted by day, and those who are used up by night. But the proportional change of magnitude is different in each case. Now, for one example out of many. If under normal, i.e., average social condi- tions of production, a pounds of cotton ought to be made into b pounds of yarn by one hour's labour, then a day's labour does not count as 12 hours' labour unless 12 a pounds of cotton have been made into 12 b pounds of yarn; for in the creation of value, the time that is socially necessary alone counts. In all such cases, there must be the possibility of throwing great masses of men suddenly on the decisive points without injury to the scale of production in other spheres. Hilary Sessions, County Antrim, 1860." 3 It is very characteristic of the regime of Louis Philippe, the bourgeois king, that the one Factory Act passed during his reign, that of March 22nd, 1841, was never put in force. . On the other hand, it is only from this moment that the produce of labour universally becomes a commodity. Manufacture is characterised by the differentiation of the instruments of labour— a differentiation whereby implements of a given sort acquire fixed shapes, adapted to each particular ap- plication, and by the specialisation of those instruments, giving to each special implement its full play only in the hands of a spe- cific detail labourer. 2 "A Discourse on the necessity of encouraging Mechanick Industry," London, 1690, p. 3yd." 4 Here we have more produced in eleven hours than previously in twelve, and entirely in consequence of more steady application and econ- omy of time by the workpeople. To this the Children's Employment Commissioners answer: "The circumstances of this case are precisely analogous to that of the paper-stainers, dealt with in our first report. So far as it is the art of gaining a livelihood, it is limited to procuring those articles that are necessary to existence, and useful either to a household or the state. The New York and Philadelphia manufacturers had previously been in the habit of "making" umbrellas with all their belongings. 3 It was, indeed, very much improved by Watt's first so-called single acting engine; but, in this form, it continued to be a mere machine for rais- ing water, and the liquor from salt mines. SECTION 4.— DIVISION OF LABOUR IN MANUFACTURE, AND DIVISION OF LABOUR IN SOCIETY We first considered the origin of Manufacture, then its sim- ple elements, then the detail labourer and his implements, and finally, the totality of the mechanism. With the equivalent form it is just the contrary. 479. The price-form of the linen is therefore 20 yards of linen =2 ounces of gold, or, if 2 ounces of gold when coined are £2, 20 yards of linen =£2. " (1. They perform this weary task, in London especially, for 14, 15, and 16 hours at a stretch, during several days in the week, and frequently for 36 hours, with only 2 hours' rest for meals and sleep. o If the value of 30s. It is his labour of last week, or of last year, that pays for his labour-power this week or this year. If the quantity of paper money issued be double what it ought to be, then, as a matter of fact, £1 would 1 1 be the money-name not of -r of an ounce, but of -~ of an ounce of gold. 80-81, note 2, what he understands by "Vulgar Economy."—/?'. The more or less favourable circumstances in which the wage-working class supports and multiplies itself, in no way alter the fundamental character of capitalist production. Redgrave, Inspector of Factories, asserts that this time the system under which orphans and pauper children were treated "legally" as apprentices "was not accompanied with the old abuses" (on these "abuses" see Engels. If the total of the commodi- ties required daily for the production of labour-power = A, and those required weekly ==B, and those required quarterly = C, and so on, the daily average of these commodities =— — ' ^~ — i— m Suppose that in this mass of commodities requisite for the average day there are embodied 6 hours of social labour, then there is incorporated daily in labour-power half a day's average social 1 Petty. Among other things it is said: "From an elaborate comparison between the diet of convicts in the convict prisons in England, and that of paupers in work- houses and of free labourers in the same country ... The restless never-ending process of profit-making alone 1 Aristotle opposes (Economic to Chrematistic. 671.) The women earn by the same working-time a week's wage of only 5 shillings. "Ne sutor ultra crepi- dam" — this nee plus ultra of handicraft wisdom became sheer nonsense, from the moment the watchmaker Watt invented the steam-engine, the barber Arkwright, the throstle, and the working- jeweller, Fulton, the steamship. Mill says: "The cause of profit is that labour produces more than is required for its support." So far, nothing but the old story; but Mill wishing to add something of his own, proceeds: "To vary the form of the theorem; the reason why capital yields a profit, is because food, clothing, materials and tools, last longer than the time which was required to produce them." He here con- founds the duration of labour-time with the duration of its prod- ucts. Their ignorance and complete mis- understanding of facts 1 are worthily paralleled by the economists, who interpret the above phenomena of accumulation by saying that there are now too few, now too many wage-labourers. 2 "The Labour, that is the economic time, of society, is a given portion, say ten hours a day of a million of people, or ten million hours.... . 1 It thus creates at the same time one of the material 1 Darwin in his epoch-making work on the origin of species, remarks, with reference to the natural organs of plants and animals, "So long as one and the same organ has different kinds of work to perform, a ground lor its changeability may possibly be found in this, that natural selection preserves or suppresses each small variation of form less carefully than if that organ were destined for one special purpose alone. The stock of human happiness is thereby much increased, whilst the more delicate are not only relieved from drudg- ery. . In other words, its absolute amount decreases, but its amount, relatively to the total value of the product, of a pound of yarn, for instance, increases. . 216. and 2s. On the other hand the economists had to contend against the popular prejudice, that confuses capi- talist production with hoarding, 4 and fancies that accumulated 1 "Capital, viz., accumulated wealth employed with a view to profit." (Malthus, 1. This two and a half days' labour is also represented by a piece of gold of the value of fifteen shil- lings. — This applies to Germany too. is bracin 280 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION from 5.30 a. But in the process of production the place of the £90 is taken by the labour-power in action, dead labour is replaced by living la- bour, something stagnant by something flowing, a constant by a variable. Emp. To assert that the surplus-value acquired by the producer has its origin in the fact that consumers pay for commodities more than their value, is only to say in other words: The owner of commodities possesses, as a seller, the 1 "By the augmentation of the nominal value of the produce ... The Governor-General took part in this private traffic. c, pp. With the abolition of the Corn Laws in 1846, this monopoly was suddenly removed. Sixth Report, 1867," p. exchange for the same amount as present labour. This simultaneous increase is therefore possible in two cases, one, the actual lengthening of the working-day, the other, an increase in the intensity of labour unaccompanied by such lengthening. 9 1 Ure, 1. The work of supervision becomes their established and exclusive function. Thus is it with Wakefield. The wind-mill itself they got from Germany, where its invention was the origin of a pretty squabble be- tween the nobles, the priests, and the emperor, as to which of those three the wind "belonged." The air makes bondage, was the cry in Germany, at the same time that the wind was making Holland free. c, pp. In the complete metamorphosis of the linen, for example, linen — money — Bible, the linen first falls out of circulation, and money steps into its place. This change of form no more implies, taken alone, a change in the quantity of value, than does the change of a £5 note into sover- eigns, half sovereigns and shillings. 75.) EXPROPRIATION OF AGRICULTURAL POPULATION 725 demands a "general Act of Parliament for the enclosure of Com- mons" (admitting thereby that a parliamentary coup d'etat is necessary for its transformation into private property), and more- over calls on the legislature for the indemnification for the expropriated poor. c, p 142. or 12s. We, therefore, first of all consider accumulation from an abstract point of view— i.e., as a mere phase in the actual proc- ess of production. Bunbury, Bart., on the High Price of Provisions. If the fol- lowers of Ricardo answer Bailey somewhat rudely, and by no means convinc- ingly, the reason is to be sought in this, that they were unable to find in Ricardo's own works any key to the hidden relations existing between value and its form, exchange-value. 61, sq. The teeming valley of the Nile... Thus there is nothing to disturb their application to their calling.... The truth is that he performs no such miracle. Yet evidently it is only in a qualified sense that the work can be deemed self-supporting And on a very large scale the nominal self-support can be only a circuit, longer or shorter, to pauperism." l The intimate connexion between the pangs of hunger of the most industrious layers of the working-class, and the extravagant consumption, coarse or refined, of the rich, for which capitalist accumulation is the basis, reveals itself only when the economic laws are known. It is not before the day fixed for payment that the means of pay- ment actually steps into circulation, leaves the hand of the buyer for that of the seller. is taken from the second book of Plato's Republic." 2 Thus, in the Odyssey xiv., 228, "AUo<; fop t'SUoicjiv dvtjp femt.pTtetai fpYOi?," and Archilochus in Saxtus Empiricus, "aUo? is deducted. 253. "It is no wonder that ignorance and vice abound in a population so brought up. The manufacturers again found that they were short of hands. F. Hence the invention now-a-days of machines in Eng- land that are employed only in North America; just as in the six- teenth and seventeenth centuries, machines were invented in Ger- many to be used only in Holland, and just as many a French invention of the eighteenth century was exploited in England alone. of raw material to weigh 26 lbs. refer especially to the labour- ers in coal mines. Let us examine the matter more closely. 3 Price, 1. is the new value created during the spinning process: of this one half replaces the value of the day's labour-power, or the variable capital, the remaining half constitutes a surplus-value of 3s. They must be conscious that much bodily and men- tal pain has thus been inflicted upon them from causes for which they were in no way answerable; to which, had it been in their power, they would have in no way consented; and against which they were powerless to struggle." (1. Evi- dence, 23rd July, 1866." This Report is the work of a Parliamen- tary Committee selected from members of the House of Commons, and authorised to summon and examine witnesses. 588.) "Do not mining engineers possess a sort of public character, and do not you think that they are above making such a partial decision as you appre- hend?" "I do not wish to answer such a question as that with re- spect to the personal character of those men. of cotton were concentrated in the 13-y lbs. Meanwhile, they become degraded, they fall ill, one and all, whilst the mildly liberal Forster, M.P., sheds tears over the blessings of Free-trade, and the profits of the eminent men of Bradford who deal in worsted. 429.) 6 "Currency (!) employed in producing articles ... Nevertheless, the popular intuition was not at fault. If now its value fall, this fact is first evidenced by a change in the prices of those commodities that are directly bar- tered for the precious metals at the sources of their production. In a working-day of 10 hours with average labour the result is: necessary labour =3^ hours, and surplus-labour =6^. By practice it is known how much is the average product of one hour. 278,837,438 MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 419 posed of various mechanical and intellectual organs,, acting in uninterrupted concert for the production of a common object, all of them being subordinate to a self-regulated moving force." These two descriptions are far from being identical. Let us, therefore, assume an exchange of non- equivalents. It enters into the faux frais of capitalist production; but capital knows how to throw these, for the most part, from its own shoulders on to those of the working-class and the lower middle class. The product of 6 hours' work has increased six-fold, from 6 lbs. 892 . In the markets of the world a double measure of value holds sway, gold and silver. To them, their own social action takes the form of tjie action of objects, which rule the producers instead of being ruled by them. He creates surplus-value which, for the capitalist, has all the charms of a creation out of nothing. 2 These steam- 1 "The Industry of Nations," Lond., 1855, Part II., p. Further, a stimulus would be given to the multiplication of the smaller places of work, which are almost invariably the least favourable to the health, comfort, education, and general improvement of the people." 3 In its final report the Commission proposes to subject to the Factory Act more than 1,400,000 children, young persons, and women, of which number about one half are exploited in small industries and by the so-called home-work. 15.9 Bere 1 Rye J 8,894 10,091 1,197 i Bere, . In order that this alienation may be reciprocal, it is only necessary for men, by a tacit understanding, to treat each other as private owners of those alienable objects, and by impli- cation as independent individuals. We pass it over, however, for the present. There is no consumption of their value, 2 and it would therefore be inaccurate to say that it is reproduced. From a social point of view, the productiveness increases in the same ratio as the economy of labour, which, in its turn, includes not only economy of the means of production, but also the avoidance of all useless labour. m. . 5.) 1 "You take my life When you do take the means whereby 1 live." Shakespeare. c, p. He leaves this and all such like subterfuges and juggling tricks to the professors of Political Economy, who are paid for it. . ... In the first case, one coat is worth as much as two coats were before; in the second case, two coats are only worth as much as one was before, although in both cases one coat renders the same service as before, and the useful labour embodied in it remains of the same quality. This component of the value of the product, i.e., the £410 in our example, would be eliminated, but the sum of £180, the amount of new value cre- ated, or the value produced, which contains £90 of surplus-value, would remain just as great as if c represented the highest value 1 "If we reckon the value of the fixed capital employed as a part of the advances, we must reckon the remaining value of such capital at the end of the year as a part of the annual returns." (Malthus, "Princ. 2 Officials of a government which is main- 1 According to a table in Murphy's "Ireland Industrial, Political and Social," 1870, 94.6 per cent, of the holdings do not reach 100 acres, 5.4 exceed 100 acres. It destroys both the ancient and the transi- tional forms, behind which the dominion of capital is still in part concealed, and replaces them by the direct and open sway of capital; but thereby it also generalises the direct opposition to this sway. Econ.,' VoL I, p. Centralisation of the means of production and socialisation of labour at last reach a point where they become incompatible with their capitalist integument. In relation to the discharged workmen, the £1,500 worth of means of subsistence never was capital. London, 1800, p. c. The same change in productive power, which increases the fruitfulness of labour, and, in consequence, the quantity of use-values produced by that labour, will diminish the total value of this increased quantity of use-values, provided such change shorten the total labour-time necessary for their production; and vice versa. In its higher degrees it [i.e., over-crowding] almost necessarily involves such negation of all delicacy, such unclean confusion of bodies and bodily functions, such exposure of animal and sexual nakedness, as is rather bes- tial than human. 79, 80, 85. The seller of labour-power, like the seller of any other commodity, realises its exchange-value, and parts with its use-value. 291.) 4 Ricardo, I. " That excessive insobriety is prevalent from childhood upwards among the whole of this class, is only natural. The flour is given in quarters of corn. It is highly characteristic of the present status of so-called economic science, that neither Senior himself, who, at a later period, to his honour be it said, energetically supported the factory legislation, nor his opponents, from first to last, have ever been able to explain the false conclusions of the "original discovery." They appeal to actual experience, but the why and wherefore remains a mystery. XIX.) More naive is Petty, who says, it replaces "Polygamy." The above point of view is, at the most, admissible only for some parts of the United States. This would only be the case, if the primitive forest exploited him, instead of being exploited by him As far as his health is concerned, such a man would well bear comparison, not only with the modern proletarian, but also with the syphilitic and scrofulous upper classes. The celebrated sophist and sycophant, Edmund Burke, goes so far as to make the following assertion, based on his practical observations as a farmer; viz., that "in so small a platoon" as that of five farm labourers, all individual differences in the la- bour vanish, and that consequently any given five adult farm la- bourers taken together, will in the same time do as much work as any other five. And at the finish he is quite astonished to find that Destutt on the one hand agrees with him as to labour being the source of value, and on the other hand with J. It takes a "serious" man, a la Lavergne, to be caught by such childishness. I have been in a position to reduce those 33 to 13."? 282 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION the rent of land, the Tories thundered with philanthropic in- dignation against the "nefarious practices" 1 of their foes. or 8s., to 9s., &c. With very few exceptions, the general statement that no means are taken to secure the health of the inhabitants would be true of all of them. If we keep in view the material fact alone that a commodity has been exchanged for gold, we overlook the very thing that we ought to observe — namely, what has happened to the form of the commodity. 16, § 3.) 4 "Undoubtedly much of the work now done by children in gangs used to be done by men and women. 11.) 535 PART VI WAGES CHAPTER XIX TEE TRANSFORMATION OF THE VALUE (AND RESPECTIVELY THE PRICE) OF LABOUR-POWER INTO WAGES On the surface of bourgeois society the wage of the labourer appears as the price of labour, a certain quantity of money that is paid for a certain quantity of labour. that in order to convert mon- ey into capital something more is required than the production and circulation of commodities. Giv- en the length of the working-day, the prolongation of the surplus- labour must of necessity originate in the curtailment of the neces- sary labour-time; the latter cannot arise from the former. He does individually, what the whole body of capitalists engaged in producing relative sur- 1 "A man's profit does not depend upon his command of the produce of other men's labour, but upon his command of labour itself. There, the existence of the things qua commodities, and the value-relation between the products of labour which stamps them as commodities, have absolutely no connexion with their physical properties and with the material relations arising therefrom. He works on his own land, with his own means of production, for, say, 3 days a week. 247. Report IV., 1865," p. MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OF COMMODITIES H5 point. But he himself takes care to let both beast and implement feel that he is none of them, but is a man. Parry, M. c. To wear fine cloaks, golden chains, rings, to wipe his mouth, to be deemed and taken for a worthy, pious man... One name that they preached about was Jesus Christ, but I cannot say any others, and J cannot tell anything about him. f pp 29, 30, 25.) 130 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION SECTION 3.— MONEY The commodity that functions as a measure of value, and, either in its own person or by a representative, as the medium of circulation, is money. In other words, piece-wage is lowered in the same proportion as the number of the pieces pro- duced in the same time rises, 4 and therefore as the working-time spent on the same piece falls. Look, for example, at those schemes of the masters which the "respectable" press praised as models of "what a reasonable degree of care and method can accomplish." The personnel of the workpeople was J Reports, &c, for 30th April, 1849, p. . 1863," p. Empl. 826,783 . One law holds in Yorkshire, another in Lancashire; one law in one parish of Lancashire, another in its immediate neighbourhood. . Up to this point it has been assumed that the increase or diminution of the variable capital corresponds rigidly with the increase or diminution of the number of labourers employed. Inversely, the former division reacts upon and develops and multiplies the latter. Hand in hand with this centralisation, or this expropriation of many capitalists by few, develop, on an ever-extending scale, the co- operative form of the labour-process, the conscious technical application of science, the methodical cultivation of the soil, the transformation of the instruments of labour into instruments of labour only usable in common, the economising of all means of production by their use as the means of production of combined, socialised labour, the entanglement of all peoples in the net of the world-market, and with this, the international character of the capitalistic regime. From a concrete point of view, accumulation resolves itself into the reproduction of capital on a progressively increasing scale. To this, was. Population grew. A commodity, such as iron, corn, or a diamond, is therefore, so far as it is a material thing, a use-value, something useful. Thus real changes in the magnitude of value are neither un- equivocally nor exhaustively reflected in their relative expression, that is, in the equation expressing the magnitude of relative value. Surplus-value, therefore, splits up into various parts. This they call a temporary inconvenience." ("A Prize Essay on the Comparative Merits of Competition and Co-operation." Loud., 1834, p 29.) 432 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION The Governor General reported 1834-35: "The misery hardly finds a parallel in the history of commerce. If now, in a c, the working-day of 12 hours, we move the point b to b', b c becomes b' c; the sur- plus-labour increases by one half, from 2 hours to 3 hours, although the working-day remains as before at 12 hours. 1855," p. But it is clear that according to the length of the working-day, that is, according to the amount of actual labour daily supplied, the same daily or weekly wage may represent very different prices of labour, i.e., very different sums of 1 The value of money itsell is here always supposed constant. His employment should be a general atten- tion to the whole: his thresher must be watched, or he will soon lose his wages in corn not threshed out; his mowers, reapers, &c, must be looked after; he must constantly go round his fences; he must see there is no neglect; which would be the case if he was confined to any one spot." ("An Inquiry into the Connexion between the Present Price of Provisions and the Size of Farms, &c. Toute religion qui n'est pas la leur, est une invention des hommes, tandis que leur propre religion est une emanation de Dieu — Ainsi il y a eu de l'histoire, mais il n'y en a plus." (Karl Marx. On a closer examination of the working machine proper, we find in it, as a general rule, though often, no doubt, under very altered forms, the apparatus and tools used by, the handicraftsman or manufacturing workman; with this difference, that instead of being human implements, they are the implements of a mechanism, or mechanical implements. 2 1 1. A B G. nous tendons a separer toute espece de propriety d'avec toute espece de travail." (Sismondi; "Nouveaux Principes d'Econ. Since then they have grown yet worse. But the value of a commodity measures the degree of its attraction for all other elements of material wealth, and therefore measures the social wealth of its owner. 24, s. >s C3 t, as ft >?* 7^ <-> srage quantit orn, &c, in onsamed ann er head over bove the roduce consi a. The circulation becomes the great social retort into which every- thing is thrown, to come out again as a gold-crystal. 1 This expenditure of labour-power comes to him gratis. When the process of production is finished, we get a commodity whose value =(c+ v)-j-s, where s is the surplus-value; or taking our former figures, the value of this commodity may be (£410 const. He reported, that from a hygienic point of view, and apart from the banish- ment of the operatives from the factory atmosphere, the crisis had several advantages. &.c, Par M. The directing motive, the end and aim of capitalist produc- tion, is to extract the greatest possible amount of surplus-value, 1 and consequently to exploit labour-power to the greatest possible extent. The younger boys are chiefly employed in opening and shutting the ventilating doors in the various parts of the mine; the older ones 498 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION are employed on heavier work, in carrying coal, &c. Author, the Rev. 1 As the conscious representative of this movement, the pos- sessor of money becomes a capitalist. The secret of the expression of value, namely, that all kinds of labour are equal and equivalent, because, and so far as they are human labour in general, cannot be deciphered, until the notion of human equality has already acquired the fixity of a popular prejudice. m. We saw that on the one side the posses- sor of value or money, on the other, the possessor of the value-creat- ing substance; on the one side, the possessor of the means of pro- duction and subsistence, on the other, the possessor of nothing but labour-power, must confront one another as buyer and seller. Still the manufacturing period, properly so called, does not, suc- ceed in carrying out this transformation radically and complete- ly. 6,7. 4 Reports, &c, I. Hence a child, until he is grown up, costs his parents not more, on the whole, than twenty drachmas. Note further: If only the nai- vete of the schoolmaster could apply, to the conditions of produc- tion and population of the nineteenth century, the standard of the 14th, this naivete, into the bargain, overlooked the fact that whilst, after the plague and the decimation that accompanied it, followed on this side of the Channel, in England, enfranchisement and enrichment of the agricultural population, on that side, in France, followed greater servitude and more misery. III.," p. There are always too many agricultural labourers for the ordinary, and always too few for the exceptional or tem- porary needs of the cultivation of the soil. In 1835 " (query— 1815 or 1825?) "the spinner put up daily, on each of these mules, 820 stretches, making a total of 1,640 stretches in the course of the day. entirely confined to classes of property .... 1.484 Post Office Orders, . The utility of a thing makes it a use-value. While the labourer, by virtue of his labour being of a specialised kind that has a special object, preserves and transfers to the product the value of the means of production, he at the same time, by the mere act of working, creates each instant an additional or new value. But this is not all; when our yarn goes to the manufacturers, it is so much better by the application of our new machinery, that they will produce a greater quantity of cloth, and cheaper than from the yarn produced by old machin- ery." 1 Mr. Redgrave further remarks in the same Report: "The reduction of hands against increased production is, in fact, con- stantly taking place; in woollen mills the reduction commenced some time since, and is continuing; a few days since, the master of a school in the neighbourhood of Rochdale said to me, that the great falling off in the girls' school is not only caused by the dis- tress, but by the changes of machinery in the woollen mills, in con- sequence of which a reduction of 70 short-timers had taken place." 2 The following table shows the total result of the mechanical improvements in the English cotton industry due to the Ameri- can Civil War. For the conversion of his money into capital, therefore, the owner of money must meet in the market with the free labourer, free in the double sense, that as a free man he can dispose of his labour-power as his own commodity, and that on the other hand he has no other commodity for sale, is short of everything neces- sary for the realisation of his labour-power. In all European countries in which the conscrip- tion holds, since its introduction, the medium height of adult men, and generally their fitness for military service, has diminished. 402 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION language, made up their book, they return to the print work, where they continue until the six months have expired, when another instalment of school attendance becomes due, and they again seek the school until the book is again made up. It can therefore be replaced by paper symbols. They have in their minds the means of subsistence of the liberated workpeople. When this happens, their place is made up by one or more boys, who work in the other turn. Partie, p. 810.) 2 Compare W. m. Part of them emi- grates, following in fact capital that has emigrated. Whether complex or simple, each operation has to be done by hand, retains the character of a handicraft, and is therefore dependent on the strength, skill, quickness, and sureness, of the individual work- man in handling his tools. Or, as old Barbon says, "one sort of wares are as good as another, if the values be equal. Sparks in "Positions to be examined concerning National Wealth," p. A frightful source of demoralisation is the mode of living. Hence, if we desire to calculate the average money wages received by each labourer, we have simply to divide the amount of this capital by the number of the labouring population." 2 That is to say, we first add together the individual wages actually paid, and then we affirm that the sum thus obtained, forms the total value of the "labour-fund" determined and vouchsafed to us by God and Nature. This exploitation existed always to a certain extent among peasants, and was the more developed, the heavier the yoke pressing on the husbandman. m. la troisieme division d'industrie, celle enfin qu'on devrait qualifier de division de la besogne ou de travail proprement dit, est celle qui s'etablit dans les arts et les metiers separes ... In speaking of payment of labour, instead of pay- ment of labour-power, I only talk your own slang. • 8.6 Potatoes, . Therefore the labour-time requisite for the production of labour-power reduces itself to that necessary for the production of those means of subsistence; in other words, the value of labour- power is the value of the means of subsistence necessary for the maintenance of the labourer. On the other hand, the value of the labour-power cannot rise from three shillings to four, without a decrease in the productiveness of labour, whereby eight hours become requisite to produce the same quantity of necessaries, for the production of which six hours previously sufficed. In the case of 258 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION during the 24 hours, offers very welcome opportunities of exceeding the limits of the normal working-day, e. All individual distinctions are merged in those of "full-timers" and "half-timers." 3 SECTION 3.— BRANCHES OF ENGLISH INDUSTRY WITHOUT LEGAL LIMITS TO EXPLOITATION We have hitherto considered the tendency to the extension of the working-day, the were-wolf's hunger for surplus-labour in a department where the monstrous exactions, not surpassed, says an English bourgeois economist, by the cruelties of the Spaniards to the American red-skins, 4 caused capital at last to be bound by the chains of legal regulations. The portion of the capital invested in the pur- chase of labour-power is a definite quantity of materialised labour, a constant value like the value of the labour-power purchased. Econ." London, 1832, pp. But if, on the one hand, variation of work at present imposes itself after the manner of an overpowering natural law, and with the blindly destructive ac- tion of a natural law that meets with resistance 2 at all points, Modern Industry, on the other hand, through its catastrophes imposes the necessity of recognising, as a fundamental law of pelled to face with sober senses his real conditions of life, and his relations with his kind." (F. How, then, in old Europe, was the expropriation of the labourer from his conditions of labour, i.e., the co-existence of capital and wage-labour, brought about? All persons have the right to take away the children of the vaga- bonds and to keep them as apprentices, the young men until the 24th year, the girls until the 20th. The capitalist, for- merly a buyer, now returns to market as a seller, of commodities. 2 The habit of doing only one thing converts him into a never fail- ing instrument, while his connexion with the whole mechanism compels him to work with the regularity of the parts of a ma- chine. 126.) 231 CH APTER X THE WORKING-DAY SECTION 1.— THE LIMITS OF THE WORKING-DAY We started with the supposition that Labour-power is bought and sold at its value. The numberless shades, that it at first sight presents, correspond to the intermediate stages lying between these two extremes. 53.) On the vileness of this system, cf. Howitt, a man who makes a speciality of Christianity, says: "The barbarities and 1 "The Natural and Artificial Rights of Property Contrasted." Lond., 1832, pp. 170.) An English econ- omist remarks upon the conjuring tricks of the same nature that appear in Say's "Lettres": "Those affected ways of talking make up in general that which M. With the increase of capital, the difference between the capi- tal employed and the capital consumed increases. For the first time, legislation saw itself compelled to control directly and officially the labour of adults. 3 How the capitalists as a class are to perform that feat, is a secret that vulgar economy has hitherto obstinately refused to divulge. 2 1. urges emigration. It comprises a series of forcible methods, of which we have passed in review only those that have been epoch-making as meth- ods of the primitive accumulation of capital. It enabled a totally inexperienced boy, to set the whole loom with all its shuttles in motion, by simply moving a rod backwards and forwards, and in its improved form produced from 40 to 50 pieces at once. These forms vary ac- cording to the extent to which the sewing-machine has become prev- alent in one branch of industry or the other, to the time during which it has been in operation, to the previous condition of the workpeople, to the preponderance of manufacture, of handicrafts 1 An instance. Where things are tending to the above result, often the cottages which stand, testify, in their un- repaired and wretched condition, to the extinction to which they are doomed. p 48. There also I return to the condition of the small farmers and the agricultural labour- ers. THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 711 NUMBER AND EXTENT OF FARMS IN IRELAND IN 1864 (1) Farms not over 1 acre. But we cannot, except by a miracle, con- vert into capital anything but such articles as can be employed in the labour-process (i.e., means of production), and such further CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO CAPITAL 581 articles as are suitable for the sustenance of the labourer (i.e., means x>i subsistence). Accumulation of wealth at one pole is, therefore, at the same time accumulation of misery, agony of toil, slavery, ignorance, brutality, mental degradation, at the opposite pole, i.e., on the side of the class that produces its own product in the form of capital. A piece of ribbon for making which the weaver got 6s. c, p. In order to entice the money out of that pocket, our friend's commodity must, above all things, be a use-value to the owner of the money. c, pp. (n. 3 1. s. 4 3 7 " 8. First report, etc., 1863. Thus, for instance, Fielden, himself a manufacturer, says: "It is evident that the long hours of work were brought about by the circumstance of so great a number oi destitute chil- dren being supplied from different parts of the country, that the masters were independent of the hands, and that having once established the cus- tom by means of the miserable materials they had procured in this way, they could impose it on their neighbours with the greater facility." (J. They work for the same number of 1 And now forsooth children are employed at file-cutting in Sheffield. l Commodities are thus sold not for the purpose of buying others, but in order to replace their commodity-form by their money-form. The differentiation of commodities into commodities and money does not sweep away these inconsistencies, but develops a mo- dus vivendi, a form in which they can exist side by side. .< 430,535 „ 105 „ 584,458 m 122 u 646,377 „ 26 „ 736,448 „ 28 „ 262,610 „ 3 „ 264,528 „ 3 1 „ England, a country with fully developed capitalist produc- tion, and pre-eminently industrial, would have bled to death with such a drain of population as Ireland has suffered. 234, sqq.) "Our men complained very much of the bad ventilation of the collie- ries . These objects, gold and silver, just as they come out of the bowels of the earth, are forthwith the direct incarnation of all human labour. It is the same as if he had bought the -product ready made in the market. THE WORKING-DAY 249 geniously put it, "sophisticated" goods. Bd. p. 186.) In Elizabeth's time, "rogues were trussed up apace, and that there was not one year commonly wherein three or four hundred were not devoured and eaten up by the gallowes." (Strype's Annals of the Reforma- tion and Establishment of Religion, and other Various Occurrences in the Church of England during Queen Elizabeth's Happy Reign." Seconded., 1725, Vol. The passion of capital for an unlimited and reckless extension of the working-day, is first gratified in the industries earliest revolutionised by water-power, steam, and machinery, in those first creations of the modern mode of production, cot- ton, wool, flax, and silk spinning, and weaving. Hence "the number of accidents which occur on Fridays, and especially on Saturdays, is much larger than on any other day. But to enable it to render to its owner the service of a universal equivalent, it must be actually replaced by gold. Suppose that a capitalist pays for a day's labour-power at its value; then the right to use that power for a day belongs to him, just as much as the right to use any other commodity, such as a horse that he has hired for the day. Hence, as the use of machinery extends in a given industry, the immediate effect is to increase production in the other in- dustries that furnish the first with means of production. While they fail to do this, their mere existence causes a relative loss to the capitalist, for they represent during the time they lie fallow, a useless advance of capital. The rise of wages therefore is confined within limits that not only leave in- tact the foundations of the capitalistic system, but also secure its reproduction on a progressive scale. The move- ment of the commodity is therefore a circuit. 47, and 153. of cotton absorb, during their conversion into yarn, only 150 hours' labour, or fifteen days' labour of ten hours each. c, pp. The latter sum, supposing wages unchanged, would form a fund sufficient to employ about 16 out of the 50 men discharged; nay, less than 16, for, in order to be em- ployed as capital, a part of this £500 must now become constant capital, thus leaving only the remainder to be laid out in labour- power. But this transformation itself can only take place under certain circumstances that centre in this, viz., that two very different kinds of commodity-possessors must come face to face and into contact; on the one hand, the owners of money, means of production, means of subsistence, who are eager to increase the sum of values they possess, by buying other people's labour-power; on the other hand, free labourers, the sellers of their own labour-power, and therefore the sellers of labour. Gold (or silver) is therefore money. It must be remembered that it is of the highest importance to manu- facturers that their machinery should be in motion, i.e., producing yarns and goods. [Added in the 4 th German edition.— "Since then they have developed into the country 452 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION eft oo CM •tf CO V}< CM o 3 CO CM ^-i NT $ 00 fc co N? It becomes a question of life and death for society to adapt the mode of production to the normal functioning of this law. Thus the solid crystal of their organisation, based on the old division of labour, becomes dis- solved, and makes way for constant changes. Besides, the new landed aristocracy was the natural ally of the new bankocracy, of the newly-hatched haute finance, and of the large manufacturers, then depending on protective duties. Others such as clothes and furniture last for longer periods and require to be replaced only at longer intervals. What every mechanical workman has now to do, and what every boy can do, is not to work himself but to superintend the beautiful labour of the machine. Rep., 1866," p, 114,1). I should add, for your (the Home Secretary's) informa- tion that an isolated house, called the Pest-house, which is set apart for parishioners who might be suffering from infectious dis- eases, has been continually occupied by such patients for many months past, and is also now occupied; that in one family five children died from small-pox and fever; that from the 1st April to the 1st September this year, a period of five months, there have been no fewer than ten deaths from small-pox in the parish, four of them being in the huts already referred to; that it is impossible to ascertain the exact number of persons who have suffered from that disease although they are known to be many, from the fact of the families keeping it as private as possible." 1 The labourers in coal and other mines belong to the best paid categories of the British proletariat. adds value to products, for the same products in the hands of consumers, are worth more than in the hands of producers, and it may strictly be considered an act of produc- tion." 1 But commodities are not paid for twice over, once on account of their use-value, and again on account of their value. In the paper industry generally, we may advantageously study in detail not only the distinctions between modes of production based on different means of production, but also the connexion of the social conditions of production with those modes: for the old German paper-making furnishes us with a sample of handicraft production; that of Holland in the 17th and of France in the 18th century with a sample of manufacturing in the strict sense; and that of modern England with a sample of automatic fabrication of this article. His "Essays" are a cookery book with receipts of all kinds for replacing by somesuccedaneum the ordinary dear food of the labourer. For instance, "Commerce ... Whence, then, arises the enigmatical character of the product of labour, so soon as it assumes the form of commodities? But, while thus in- corporating labour generally, that is value, it is by the particular form alone of the labour, by the spinning, the weaving and the forging respectively, that the means of production, the cotton and spindle, the yarn and loom, and the iron and anvil become constituent elements of the product, of a new use-value. of yarn, care must be taken that no more than this weight of cotton is consumed in the production of 1 lb. The new Factory Act of June 8th, 1847, enacted that on July 1st, 1847, there should be a preliminary shortening of the working-day for "young persons" (from 13 to 18), and all fe- males to 11 hours, but that on May 1st, 1848, there should be a definite limitation of the working-day to 10 hours. The exchange of equivalents, the original operation with which we start- ed, has now become turned round in such a way that there is only an apparent exchange. In a society whose pivot, to use an expression of Fourier, was agriculture on a small scale, with its subsidiary domestic industries, and the urban handicrafts, the means of communication and transport were so utterly inadequate to the productive requirements of the manufacturing period, with its extended division of social labour, its concentration of the instruments of labour, and o£ the workmen, and its colonial markets, that they became in fact revolutionised. Roscher during two days, does more work than two needle- women employed together during one day. If we now consider the completed metamorphosis of a com- modity, as a whole, it appears in the first place, that it is made up of two opposite and complementary movements, C — M and M — G. Its first function arises out of the conditions to which the currency of gold and silver coins is subject. . It is the measure of value inasmuch as it is the socially recognised incarnation of human ratio soon came into conflict again with the real one. THE RATE OF SURPLUS-VALUE 221 is due to mere re-appearance in it, of the value of the means of production (20 ibs. Any CO-OPERATION 323 average magnitude, however, is merely the average of a number of separate magnitudes all of one kind, but differing as to quantity. c, p. A silk manufacturer naively states to the Children's Employment Commissioners: "I am quite sure that the true secret of producing efficient workpeople is to be found in uniting education and labour from a period of childhood. He repeated that prom- ise on the 23rd July last, but although since the date of the last promise there have been several cases of small-pox in his huts, and two deaths from the same disease, yet he has taken no steps whatever to carry out his promise. 2 All well-developed forms of capitalist production being forms of co- operation, nothing is, of course, easier, than to make abstraction from their antagonistic character, and to transform them by a word into some form of free association, as is done by A. And as a matter of fact, the value also of each single yard is but the materialised form of the same definite and socially fixed quantity of homoge- neous human labour.* We see then, commodities are in love with money, but "the course of true love never did run smooth." The quantitative division of labour is brought about in exactly the same spon- taneous and accidental manner as its qualitative division. I have five children in all. The purchaser of labour-power consumes it by setting the seller of it to work. per week, but to lodge, to clothe, to feed, and to provide medical attendance and proper superintendence for 50 or 100 of these boys, and to set aside some remuneration for them, could not be accomplished for 4s. The irrational, old-fashioned methods of agricul- ture are replaced by scientific ones. MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 415 made between the years 1848 and 1852. 7,826,332 . 219, and Gisborne: "Enquiry into the Duties GENESIS OF THE INDUSTRIAL CAPITALIST 759 With the development of capitalist production during the manufacturing period, the public opinion of Europe had lost the last remnant of shame and conscience. Instinctively they conform to the laws imposed by the nature of commodities. 3 If the labourer consumes his disposable time for himself, he robs the capitalist. Their rents doubled, trebled, quadrupled, "and in one instance, increased sixfold in eighteen years.'* (1. On the other hand, the working-day of 12 hours is, as regards him, now represented by 24 articles instead of 12. It is, of course, the fashion amongst the aristocratic shylocks to shrug their shoulders pharisaically at the building speculators, the small landlords, and the open villages. Whether it attracts them or others, the effect on the general labour demand will be nil, if this capital is just sufficient to take out of the market as many la- bourers as the machines threw upon it. In fact, the veiled slavery of Men," 1795, Vol. on Saturday. D. But then, the ancient dens afforded a certain amount of unintentional venti- lation. I found the man with his family sitting in a little back room. 1844, p. The working-day is, therefore, deter- minable, but is, per se, indeterminate. The more the capi- talist has accumulated, the more is he able to accumulate. 1 "Rep. 8 S Laing, ]. The circuit M— G— M, on the contrary, commences with money and ends with money. On the other hand, the land, in spite of its constant "relative surplus-population," is at the same time under-populated. The question therefore arises, how much money this sphere constantly absorbs? But their proportional increase or diminution > »depends on their origi- nal magnitudes before the change in the productiveness of labour took place. Political Economy takes the historical function of the capitalist in bitter earnest. (Dr. Aikin, 1. 706 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION tainedonly by bayonets and by a state of siege, now open, now dis- guised, they have to observe all the precautions of language that their colleagues in England disdain. We have seen how the forcible usurpation of this, generally accompanied by the turning of arable into pasture land, begins at the end of the 15th and extends into the 16th century. Sir F. 2 The state of the agricultural labourer at the end of the Anti- Jacobin War, during which landed proprietors, farmers, manu- facturers, merchants, bankers, stockbrokers, army-contractors, &c, enriched themselves so extraordinarily, has been already indicated above. With the accumulation of capital, therefore, the specifically capitalistic mode of production develops, and with the capital- ist mode of production the accumulation of capital. of Fact., 31st Oct., 1866," pp. I suppose he would be found fault with if he were discovered reading; he is there to mind his business, he has a duty to perform, and he has to attend to it in the first place, and I do not think it would be allowed down the pit." (ns. A poor labourer, who had to go about 4 miles to his work, answered the question, whether he could not find a cot nearer: "No; they know better than to take a man in with my large family." Tinker's End, near Winslow. These hours are, indeed, in some cases, not only cruelly but even incredibly long for children. 1858 1861 1868 England and Wales 341,170 407,593 357,052 Scotland 34,698 41,237 39,809 Ireland 3,345 2,734 4,203 United Kingdom .... They were wait- ing for their tickets, but the time had not yet arrived for the distribution. Od., which is the variable capital advanced: and we see that a new value of £3 10s. His calculation was practically confirmed in a surprising manner by its agree- ment with the miserable quantity of nourishment to which want had forced down the consumption of the cotton operatives. Price remarks on p. To have developed from the point of view of natural science, the negative, i.e., destructive side of modern agriculture, is one of Liebig's immortal merits. 14.) 146 PART II THE TRANSFORMATION OF MONEY INTO CAPITAL CHAPTER IV THE GENERAL FORMULA FOR CAPITAL The circulation of commodities is the starting-point of capital. It becomes the commodity that is the universal subject-matter of all con- tracts. x Encourage or allow (!) the work- ing-power to emigrate, and what of the capitalist?... The class-struggles of the ancient world took the form chiefly of a contest between debtors and creditors, which in Rome ended in the ruin of the plebeian debtors. Awaye thei trudge, 1 say, owte of their knowen accustomed houses, fyndynge no place to reste in. 314) (present volume, p. The question I would put then is this — Is the trade worth retaining? vi.) "The little masters generally have very irregular hours. It is true that the value of money varies, at one time in consequence of a variation in its own value, at another, in consequence of a change in the values of commodities. m.; on the average in France more than half are rejected on account of deficient height or bodily weakness. If machine makers would only invent a self-sweeper, by whose use the necessity for these little children to creep under the machinery might be prevented, it would be a happy addition to our protective measures." ("Reports of Insp. In conse- quence of a quarrel with his employer he left the works, and de- clared that under no circumstances would he work for that master any more. aX^ in' ipy<? Let us now examine the product of this prolonged process. The apparent correctness of their reasons will be best shown by the Lord Ashley, J. 1 But, although the money that performs the functions of a measure of value is only ideal money, price depends entirely upon the actual substance that is money. . 24. The absence of real criticism and even of honesty, in that catalogue culminates in the sections devoted to the history of the theory of money; the reason is that MacCulloch in this part of the work is flattering Lord Over- stone whom he calls "facile princeps argentariorum." 1 For instance, in subsidies, money loans for carrying on wars or for enabling banks to resume cash payments, &c, it is the money-form, and no other, of value that may be wanted. 1 Hence we find in the official documents contradictory complaints from the same places of deficiency and excess of labour simultaneously. It must be remem- bered that privation of food is very reluctantly borne, and that as a rule great poorness of diet will only come when other privations have preceded it. Since 12 working-hours of the spinner are embodied in 6s., it follows that in yarn of the value of 30s., there must be em- bodied 60 working-hours. 42, 43, 44. 1750.) "That equally applies to agricultural employments, does it not?" "Yes, but that is only for two seasons, and we have work all the four seasons " (n. They are liable to be urged, at times by the parish officers, at times by employers, under threats of being themselves discharged, to be taken to work at an age when ... But we may affirm this much, that just as true paper money takes its rise in the function of money as the circulating medium, so money based upon credit takes root spontaneously in the func- tion of money as the means of payment. The circuit M— C— M', buying in order to sell dearer, is seen most clearly in genuine merchants' capital. Thereupon, The Times published on the 24th March, 1863, a letter from Ed- mund Potter, a former president of the Manchester Chamber of Commerce. The capitalist, it is true, pays him in money, but this money is merely the transmuted form of the product of his labour. This process differs from the former in this, that it only pre-supposes a change in the distribution of capital already to hand, and func- tioning; its field of action is therefore not limited by the absolute growth of social wealth, by the absolute limits of accumulation. . a mere dead letter ... 3 EXPORT OF WOOL FROM THE CAPE TO GREAT BRITAIN. On account of the garden? . In one operation he must exert more strength, in another more skill, in another more attention; and the same indi- vidual does not possess all these qualities in an equal degree. 10. 1 12 persons George Street, No. 150 . "But then there would be the loss from so much expensive machinery, lying idle half the time, and to get through the amount of work which we are able to do on the present system, we should have to double our premises and plant, which would double the outlay." But why should these Sandersons pretend to a privilege not enjoyed by the other capitalists who only work during the day, and whose buildings, machinery, raw material, therefore lie "idle" during the night? It therefore by no means follows, that a rise in the value of money necessarily implies a proportional fall in the prices of commodities; or that a fall in the value of money implies a proportional rise in prices. Suppose that a capital-value at first is divided into 50 per cent, of constant and 50 per cent, of variable capital; later into 80 per cent, of constant and 20 per cent, of variable. They are no longer capital. * The refined and varied forms of the products are also due to new relations with the markets of the world, relations that are created by Modern Industry. Horner, Inspector of Factories," in Factories Regulation Acts. 2 The fund resulting from the sale of land at a price relatively pro- hibitory for the wage-workers, this fund of money extorted from the wages of labour by violation of the sacred law of supply and demand, the Government is to employ, on the other hand, in proportion as it grows, to import have-nothings from Europe into the colonies, and thus keep the wage-labour market full for the capitalists. The dispersion of the rural labourers over larger areas breaks their power of resistance while concentration increases that of the town operatives. In the same way, cloth manufacture, as also a whole series of other manufac- tures, arose by combining different handicrafts together under the control of a single capitalist. The former difference increases with the latter, but in a smaller degree. 2 "It is the aim of the capitalist to obtain with his expended capital the greatest possible quantity of labour (d'obtenir du capital depense la plus Forte somme de travail possible)." J. For this purpose they use two different sets of workers, of whom neither is in the work- shop more than 12 hours at a time, but the work of the establishment lasts day and night. . The destructive influence that it exercises on the condition of the wage- labourer concerns us less however, here, than the forcible expro- priation, resulting from it, of peasants, artisans, and in a word, all elements of the lower middle-class. . A brief hint at a few facts must suffice. Just as during the six hours' process our 10 lbs. Insp. c, p. This is the land of Cockaigne, into which the great Malthusian panacea, depopulation, has transformed green Erin. The struggle between these cottage factories and the factory proper, lasted over 12 years. 2 In bourgeois societies the economic fictio juris prevails, that every one, as a buyer, possesses an encyclopaedic knowledge of commodities. All combinations, contracts, oaths, &c, by which masons and carpenters reciprocally bound them- selves, were declared null and void. .... lxxi. Certificates of the debts owing for the purchased commodities circulate for the purpose of transferring those debts to others. With each improvement in the machinery, it will employ fewer. Not content with this treachery, the "great Liberal party" allowed the English judges, ever complais- ant in the service of the ruling classes, to dig up again the earlier laws against "conspiracy," and to apply them to coalitions of labour- ers. By the purchase of labour-power, the cap- italist incorporates labour, as a living ferment, with the lifeless constituents of the product. In the form of society we are about to consider, they are, in addition, the material depositories of ex- change-value. . 132. L'echange de deux valeurs inegales ... 241,120,973 lbs. by Mr. L. As to the increasing dependence ol la- bourers on the retail shopkeepers, this is the consequence of the frequent oscillations and interruptions of their employment. We now come to a ticklish point; therefore, attention! The last working- hour but one is, like the first, an ordinary working-hour, neither THE RATE OF SURPLUS-VALUE 227 more nor less. of Fact., April 30th, 1849, p. If c=0, or in other words, if there were branches of industry in which the capitalist could dispense with all means of production made by previous labour, whether they be raw material, auxiliary material, or instruments of labour, employing only labour-power and. The resources of the forest of Ben Aulder might give some idea of the loss sustained from the forced desolations. "The fact is, that prior to the Act of 1833, young persons and children were worked all night, all day, or both ad libitum." 1 A normal working-day for modern industry only dates from the Factory Act of 1833, which included cotton, wool, flax, and silk factories. All new capital, to commence with, comes on the stage, that is, on the market, whether of com- modities, labour, or money, even in our days, in the shape of money that by a definite process has to be transformed into capital. 2 In order to modify the human organism, so that it may ac- quire skill and handiness in a given branch of industry, and become labour-power of a special kind, a special education or training is requisite, and this, on its part, costs an equivalent in commodities of a greater or less amount. 1 Savages and half-civilised races use the tongue differently. B. An accessory may be consumed by the instruments of la* bour, as coal under a boiler, oil by a wheel, hay by draft-horses, or it may be mixed with the raw material in order to produce some modification thereof, as chlorine into unbleached linen, coal with iron, dye-stuff with wool, or again, it may help to carry on the work itself, as in the case of the materials used for heating and lighting workshops. lxx., n. As soon as the working-class, stunned at first by the noise and turmoil of the new system of production, recovered, in some measure, its senses, its resistance began, and first in the native land of machinism, in England. The oldest girl who is 12, minds the house. capital is productive of no profit." (Ricar- do: "Princ. 1 In a given society the limit would be reached only when the entire social capital was united in the hands of either a single capitalist or a single capitalist company. of Fact., 31 st Oct., 1865.) 3 With blast furnaces, for instance, "work towards the end of the week being generally much increased in duration in consequence of the habit of the men of idling on Monday and occasionally during a part or the whole of Tuesday also." ("Child. . A society can no more cease to produce than it can cease to consume. On the special "proletariat foncier," to which this system of parcelling out the land has given rise, see among others, the work of Col- ins, already quoted, and Karl Marx "Der Achtzehnte Brumaire des Louis Bonaparte." 2nd edition. The manufacturers elected him as their champion, not only against the newly passed Factory Act, but against the still more menacing Ten-hours' agitation. On the other hand, the simple funda- mental form of the process of accumulation is obscured by the in- cident of the circulation which brings it about, and by the split- ting up of surplus-value. 36.) 4 "La conservation d'un capital exige ... 1071.) "But he can leave that place where the wrong has been committed?" "It is general; wher- ever he goes, he has to submit to it." (n. Industrial, &c, Profits Total Schedules A. Both parts of the labour-time exist, therefore, independently, side by side one with the other. It teaches at the same time how to throw the excrements of the processes of production and consumption back again into the circle of the process of reproduction, and thus, without any previous outlay of capital, creates new matter for capital. 8 I give below the translation of this poem by Stolberg, because it brings Into relief, quite in the spirit of former quotations referring to division of labour, the antithesis between the views of the ancients and the moderns. Steel-making is simply a pretext for surplus-value making. The cost of weaving apiece of such cloth had already soon after 1850 fallen from 2s. of Fact.," 31st October, 1859, p. p. The essential difference between the various economic forms of society, between, for instance, a society based on slave-labour, and one based on wage-labour, lies only in the mode in which this surplus-labour is in each case extracted from the actual producer, the labourer. Although it adapts the detail oper- ations to the various degrees of maturity, strength, and develop- ment of the living instruments of labour, thus conducing to ex- ploitation of women and children, yet this tendency as a whole is wrecked on the habits and the resistance of the male labourers. For spinning the yarn, raw material is required; suppose in this case 10 lbs. Wherever the want of clothing forced them to it, the human race made clothes for thousands of years, without a single man becom- ing a tailor. 424.) 2 Even Watts, the apologetic, remarks: "It would be a great improve- ment to the system of piece-work, if all the men employed on a job were partners in the contract, each according to his abilities, instead of one man being interested in over-working his fellows for his own benefit." (1. xxii., n. 3. [A nation] "never thrives better, than when riches are tost from hand to hand." (Sir Dudley North: "Discourses upon Trade," Lond. The hands on strike, mothers of families as well as girls, offered to resume work if the time-keeper were replaced -by a clock, and a more reasonable scale of fines were introduced. size; and of another cloth weighing 5-^- lbs., of which 2 lbs. the creator of all wealth, no commodity". 1072.) "Could a man leave by giving 14 days' notice?" "Yes." (n. There are also in the borough more youthful prostitutes than I have known for the last 25 years." 3 We find then, in the first 45 years of the English cotton trade, from 1770 to 1815, only 5 years of crisis and stagnation; but this was the period of monopoly. Her cunning consists principally in her mediating activity, which, by causing objects to act and re-act on each other in accordance with their own nature, in this way, without any direct interference in the process, carries out reason's intentions." (He- gel: "Enzyklopadie, Erster Theil, Die Logik," Berlin, 1840, p 382.) 2 In his otherwise miserable work ("Theorie de l'Econ. 191, 192. . If the means of production, as they increase in extent and effective power, become to a less extent means of employment of labourers, this state of things is again modified by the fact that in proportion as the pro- ductiveness of labour increases, capital increases its supply of labour more quickly than its demand for labourers. . G. p. A mule is a machine for spinning cotton. The functions of hoards, therefore, arise in part out of the function of money, as the medium of the home circulation and home payments, and in part out of its function of money of the world. This hap- pens at first in such branches of industry as are connected together by being separate phases of a process, and yet are isolated by the social division of labour, in such a way, that each of them pro- duces an independent commodity. Within the 24 hours of the natural day a man can expend only a definite quantity of his vital force. In order to express the relative value of the universal equivalent, we must rather reverse the form G. The monopoly of capital becomes a fetter upon the mode of pro- duction, which has sprung up and flourished along with, and under it. 1 If this revenue serve the capitalist only as a fund to provide for his consumption, and be spent as periodically as it is gained, then, cseteris paribus, simple reproduction will take place. In this place, however, it will be enough to give a few examples from those branches of the lace-making and straw-plaiting industries that are not yet carried on by the aid of machinery, and that as yet do not compete with branches carried on in factories or in manufactories. "A morsel of the salt meat or bacon, ... Suppose, then, a machine cost as much as the wages for a year of the 150 men it displaces, say £3,000; this £3,000 is by no means the expres- sion in money of the labour added to the object produced by these 150 men before the introduction of the machine, but only of that portion of their year's labour which was expended for themselves and represented by their wages. c, pp. would be attended with no advantage; ... Even in 1698, Fletcher of Sultoun, declared in the Scotch parliament, "The number of beggars in Scotland is reckoned at not less than 200,000. The more he produces, the more he is able to sell. It is therefore in no way a relation between two magnitudes, independent one of the other: on the one hand, the magnitude of the capital; on the other, the number of the labouring population; it is rather, at bottom, only the relation between the unpaid and the paid labour of the same labouring population. They receive cottages and coal for firing "for nothing" — i.e., these form part of their wages, paid in kind. They were followed by the police, came to blows with them and escaped. 2 The chief reason is: England is at one time chiefly a cultivator of corn, at another chiefly a breeder of cattle, in alternate periods, and with these the extent of peasant cultivation fluctuates. He convinces himself with immense satis- faction, that he is a different being, by treating the one unmercifully and damaging the other con amore. 3d. Now, the profits of our manufacturers depend mainly on the power of making use of the prosperous moment when demand is brisk, and thus compensat- ing themselves for the interval during which it is slack. in the jack- frame and drawing-frame room, about one-third less in expense, and likewise one-third less in hands; in the spinning-room about one-third less in expenses. . Say, by that very example, the difference between use-value (which he here calls wealth or material riches) and exchange-value. The fibre being so short, a great 1 "Rep. In the form of society now under consideration, the behaviour of men in the social process of production is purely atomic. Therefore, the value of labour-power, and the value which that la- bour-power creates in the labour-process, are two entirely differ- ent magnitudes; and this difference of the two values was what the capitalist had in view, when he was purchasing the labour-power. Pagnini: "Saggio sopra il giusto pregio delle cose, 1751"; Custodi "Parte Moderna," t. 4. An example of the first sort is the mowing-machine; it replaces co-operation between mowers. salted and dried to the texture of mahogany, and hardly worth the difficult process of assimilation ... Consequently much labour is represented in a small compass. Working in moderation, he is, in fact, in one of the best of human positions, physically speaking. 162 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION privilege of selling too dear. . Not content with that, A and B would declare that the whole series was superfluous and nothing but Hokus Pokus; that for the future A would buy direct from B, and B sell direct to A. Toutesces causes le ruinent insensiblement, et il se trouverait hors d'etat de payer les impdts directs a l'ech6ance sans la filerie; elle lui offre une ressource, en occupant utilement sa femme, ses en- fants, ses servants, ses valets, et lui-meme; mais quelle penible vie, merae aidee de ce secours. l'ouvrier ne transmet rien de materiel." (Storch: "Gours d'Econ. — F E. The best of it is that he does not assert that things actually are as they ought to be accord- ing to his theory. In fact they give, by grace of God and law, the Sandersons a cheque on the working-time of a certain number of hands for all the 24 hours of the day, and they lose their character as capital, are therefore a pure loss for the Sandersons, as soon as their func- tion of absorbing labour is interrupted. Quantity Exported, 1851. 479.) a See "Report of the Social Science Congress, at Edinburgh." Oct., 1863. It is not the mere fertility of the soil, but the differen- tiation of the soil, the variety of its natural products, the changes 1 Diodorus, 1. xlviii), as the reason, why a very large part of the working-class, although THE BUYING AND SELLING OF LABOUR-POWER 175 purchase or as .a means of payment, this makes no alteration in the nature of the exchange of commodities. It is well known what part the despoil- ing of the Delphic Temple, by the Phocians, played in the history of Greece. On the other hand, it also functions as money, when by virtue of its function, whether that function be performed in per- son or by representative, it congeals into the sole form of value, the only adequate form of existence of exchange-value, in opposi- tion to use-value, represented by all other commodities. c, p. c, pp. 20 yards of linen =1 coat, or 20 yards of linen are worth 1 coat. Dunning, 1. On the other hand, a general fall in prices can result only, either from a fall in the values of commodities— the value of money remaining constant— or from a rise in the value of money, the values of commodities re- maining constant. 244 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION wearing away, their frames dwindling, their faces whitening, and their humanity absolutely sinking into a stone-like torpor, utterly horrible to contemplate We are not sur- prised that Mr. Mallett, or any other manufacturer, should stand forward and protest against discussion The system, as the Rev. 2 "They (gangs) have greatly increased of late years. On the same side follows Polonius Arthur Young, the unutterable sta- tistical prattler. If now our spinner by work- ing for one hour, can convert 1-| lbs. This circumstance misled Adam Smith, who treated the working-day as a constant quanti- ty, * to the assertion that the value of labour is constant, although the value of the means of subsistence may vary, and the same working-day, therefore, may represent itself in more or less money for the labourer. c, p. Centralisation, on the contrary, accomplished this in the twinkling of an eye, by means of joint-stock companies. In the introduction to his work, where he ex p rofesso praises division of labour, he indicates only in a cursory manner that it is the source of social inequalities. With two coats two men can be clothed, with 46 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION one coat only one man. How can this purely formal distinction between these processes change their character as it were by magic? 2 4 6 (9.) Kent Kennington, very seriously over-populated in 1859, when diph- theria appeared, and the parish doctor instituted a medical inquiry into the condition of the poorer classes. "The miserable routine of endless drudg- ery and toil in which the same mechanical process is gone through over and over again, is like the labour of Sisyphus. 3 Still these are exceptions in antiquity. Torrens: "On Wages and Combina- tion." London, 1834, p. During the revolt of the English factory lords between 1848 and 1850, "the head of one of the oldest and most respectable houses in the West of Scotland, Messrs. 515, 517, THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 667 of the miners. Pigs in 1865. Gf. Reports, &c, ending 31st October, 1863, p. viii., 1855. The reports of the Gh. Empl. c. . In order that gold may be held as money, and made to form a hoard, it must be prevented from circulating, or from trans- forming itself into a means of enjoyment. c, xliii. Hence, their modes of production, and of living, and their products are different. 398 ts ,976 . COMMODITIES 53 the value in use, B, into the substance in which to express its, A's, own value. profit is derived from the labour of the capitalist, and interest from his asceticism, in other words, from his "abstinence." The dodge was an old one, but the word "abstinence" was new. Since the production of surplus-value is the chief end and aim of capitalist production, it is clear, that the greatness of a man's or a nation's wealth should be measured, not by the absolute quantity produced, but by the relative magnitude of the surplus- produce. The deer-forest of Ben Aulder was. The manufacturers have "mistaken prejudices against what they have >heard represented as a pseudo- philanthropic legislation." ("Rep. The one is inanimate, the other living. Let us now assume, that the productiveness of the spinner's labour, instead of varying, remains constant, that he therefore requires the same time as he formerly did, to convert one pound of cotton into yarn, but that the exchange-value of the cotton varies, either by rising to six times its former value or falling to one-sixth of that value. Hence Capital is reckless of the health or length of life of the labourer, unless under compulsion from society. 2 "f found that men who had been getting 10s. It was, of course, far more convenient, and much more in conform- ity with the interests of the ruling classes, whom Malthus adored like a true priest, to explain this "over-population" by the eternal laws of Nature, rather than by the historical laws of capitalist production. The complaints of the Inland Revenue Commissioners of systematic fraud, especially ou the part of the commercial and industrial classes, are repeat- ed in each of their reports. In some spheres a change in the composition of capital occurs without increase of its absolute magnitude, as a consequence of simple central- isation; in others the absolute growth of capital is connected with absolute diminution of its variable constituent, or of the labour- power absorbed by it; in others again, capital continues growing for a time on its given technical basis, and attracts additional labour-power in proportion to its increase, while at other times it undergoes organic change, and lessens its variable constituent; in all spheres, the increase of the variable part of capital, and therefore of the number of labourers employed by it, is always connected with violent fluctuations and transitory production of surplus-population, whether this takes the more striking form of the repulsion of labourers already employed, or the less evident but not less real form of the more difficult absorption of the addi- tional labouring population through the usual channels. On the one hand, the longer the time neces- sary to spin a given weight of cotton into yarn, the greater is the new value added to the material; on the other hand, the greater the weight of the cotton spun in a given time, the greater is the value preserved, by being transferred from it to the product. Nor here is it even needful to consider where it would be that, if decent accommodation were provided, the cost . — F. From this same memorial we learn also that the delicate gour- mands among the aristocratic hypocrites of Exeter Hall, especially encourage this "Sunday labour." These "holy ones," so zealous in cute curanda, show their Christianity by the humility with which they bear the over-work, the privations, and the hunger of others. 9. One and the same product may therefore serve as raw material in very different processes. Wind was too inconstant and uncontrollable, and besides, in England, the birthplace of Modern Industry, the use of water- power preponderated even during the manufacturing period. Every change in this absolute value is therefore the effect, but never the cause, of a change in the magnitude of surplus-value. By the destruction of petty and domestic industries it destroys the last resort of the "redundant population," and with it the sole remaining safety-valve of the whole social mechanism. And the number of these combinations is augmented by the fact that, when these factors simultaneously vary, the amount and direction of their respective variations may differ. In remedy- ing of this inconvenience the king's wisdom was admirable, and the parliament's at that time . c. And here we have sales (by the owners of commodities) without purchases (by the owners of gold or silver). The average price of labour is found, when the average daily value of the labour-power is divided by the average number of hours in the working-day. 1 And lastly, from the moment that men in any way work for one another, their labour assumes a social form. . For the operation of spinning, cotton and spindles are a necessity, but for making rifled cannon they would be of no use whatever. C M C. The collier is also often supplied with water by the proprietor, which, whether it be good or bad, he has to pay for, or rather he suffers a deduction for from his wages." 2 In conflict with "public opinion," or even with the Officers of Health, capital makes no difficulty about "justifying" the con- ditions partly dangerous, partly degrading, to which it confines the working and domestic life of the labourer, on the ground that they are necessary for profit. "I substitute," he proudly says, "for the word capital, considered as an instru- ment of production, the word abstinence." 3 An unparalleled 1 "An Inquiry into those Principles Respecting the Nature of Demand, &c," p. But, as we have already seen, it is capable of being so replaced only in so far as it functions exclusively as coin, or as the circulating medium, and as nothing else. Therefore, whether value appears in cotton, in a spindle, or in yarn, makes no differ- ence in the amount of that value. Although the length of a c is given, b c appears to be capable of prolongation, if not by extension beyond its end c, which is also the end of the working-day a c, yet, at all events, by pushing back its starting-point b in the direction of a. Nathaniel Forster, quite on the side of the workmen.) 428 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION In the 17th century nearly all Europe experienced revolts of the workpeople against the ribbon-loom, a machine for weaving ribbons and trimmings, called in Germany Bandmuhle, Schnur- miihle, and Muhlenstuhl. m. Slow as was the advance of accumulation compared with that of more modern times, it found a check in the natural limits of the exploitable labouring population, limits which could only be got rid of by forcible means to be mentioned later. Instead of as formerly one person with two helps tenting two looms, one person now tents three looms without helps, and it is no uncommon thing for one person to tent four. est devenu le bourreau de toutes choses." Finance is the "alambic, qui a fait evaporer une quantite effroyable de biens et de den- izes pour faire ce fatal precis." "L'argent declare la guerre a tout lc genre MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OP COMMODITIES 141 depends on conditions of production that are reproduced with the regularity of natural phenomena. This is always the case when two owners of commodities buy from each other, and on the settling day the amounts mutually owing are equal and cancel each other. So long as the conditions of production remain the same, the more value the labourer adds by fresh labour, the more value he transfers and pre- serves; but he does so merely because this addition of new value takes place under conditions that have not varied and are inde- pendent of his own labour. To-day, therefore, the force of attraction, drawing together individual capitals, and the tendency to centralisation are stronger than ever before. Similar statutes: 18 Elizabeth, c. In this sense every commodity is a symbol, since, in so far as it is value, it is only the material envelope of the human labour spent upon it. Therefore, although we may be aware that gold is money, and consequently directly exchangeable for all other commodities, yet that fact by no means tells how much 10 lbs., for instance, of gold is worth. 30.) 574 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION annihilation of the necessaries of life, the continued re-appearance of the workman in the labour-market. But for a full elucidation of the law of accumulation, his condition outside the workshop must also be looked at, his condition as to food and dwelling. 349. xviii.) "In Birmingham ... MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 457 spinners and of weavers were 3s. It allows males over 13 to be worked at will day and night. Thus England is at present experiencing, not only in the colossal industry of making wear- ing apparel, but in most of the other trades mentioned above, the conversion of manufacture, of handicrafts, and of domestic work into the factory system, after each of those forms of production, totally changed and disorganised under the influence of modern industry, has long ago reproduced, and even overdone, all the horrors of the factory system, without participating in any of the elements of social progress it contains. But whether the material factors of the process are of normal quality or not, depends not upon the labourer, but entirely upon the capitalist. 804-805). 581.) Bourgeois examiner, himself a mine-owner: "But ... Rent of Land 13,893,829 2,765,387 4,891,652 22,962,885 13,003,554 2,773,644 4,836,203 32,998,394 Schedule B. On their heels treads the commercial war of the European nations, with the globe for a theatre. But this exchange-ratio may express either the real magnitude of that commodity's value, or the quantity of gold deviating from that value, for which, according to circumstances, it may be parted with. When machinery is applied to any of the preliminary or intermediate stages through which the subject of labour has to pass on its way to completion, there is an increased yield of material in those stages, and simultaneously an increased de- mand for labour in the handicrafts or manufactures supplied by the produce of the machines. Those sober virtuosi of Protestantism, the Puritans of New England, in 1703, by decrees of their assembly set a premium of £40 on every Indian scalp and every captured red-skin: in 1720 a pre- mium of £100 on every scalp; in 1744, after Massachusetts-Bay had proclaimed a certain tribe as rebels, the following prices: for a male scalp of 12 years and upwards £100 (new currency), for a male prisoner £105, for women and children prisoners £50, for scalps of women and children £50. 480, Note.) "The amount of capital devoted to the maintenance of labour may vary, independently of any changes in the whole amount of capital.... 71.) 2 "Easy labour is transmitted skill." (Th. Ilodgskin, "Popular Politi- cal Economy," p. 49, 50.) THE CONCEPT OP RELATIVE SURPLUS-VALUE 319 plus-value, do collectively. It is the expenditure of simple labour-power, i.e., of the labour-power which, on ^n average, apart from any special development, exists in the organism of every ordinary individual. Calico-printing: 1851, 12,098: 1861, 12,556. They are both money, and therefore are not qualitatively different use-values; for money is but the converted form of commodities, in which their particular use-values vanish. "At present, all the wealth of society goes first into the pos- session of the capitalist ... But in the case of increased productiveness, a given value is spread over a greater mass of products. .... The following example will show how Monsieur Say turned to account the writings of the Physiocrats, in his day quite forgotten, for the purpose of expanding the "value" of his own. "I thought," he says, "I was in the spirit before the Judge of the Universe." "Who art thou?" asked a voice. of tea, etc., that is to say, if "we give expression to the converse relation already implied in the series, we get, C. 3 3 6 " 2. Lond., 1870, p. (4.) Cambridgeshire Gamblingay belongs to several landlords. Co-operation, such as we find it at the dawn of human devel- opment, among races who live by the chase, 2 or, say, in the agri- culture of Indian communities, is based, on the one hand, on own- ership in common of the means of production, and on the other hand, on the fact, that in those cases, each individual has no more torn himself off from the navel-string of his tribe or community, than each bee has freed itself from connexion with the hive. He discovered further, that the theorems of Ricardo and others, in which existing social antagonisms and contradictions are formulated, are not the ideal product of the real economic movement, but on the contra- ry, that the real antagonisms of capitalist production in England and elsewhere are the result of the theories of Ricardo and others! Finally he discovered that it is, in the last resort, commerce that destroys the inborn beauties and harmonies of the capitalist mode of production. The number of labourers that find employment in them is directly proportional to the demand, created by those industries, for the crudest form of manual labour. If one coat represents x days' labour, two coats represent 2x days' labour, and so on. In his "Sea Board Slave States," Olmsted tells us: "I am here shown tools that no man in his senses, with us, would allow a labourer, for whom he was paying wages, to be encumbered with; and the excessive weight and clumsi- ness of which, I would judge, would make work at least ten per cent greater than with those ordinarily used with us And I am assured that, in the careless and clumsy way they must be used by the slaves, anything lighter or less rude could not be furnished them with good economy, and that such tools as we constantly give our labourers and find our profit in giving them, would not last out a day in a Virginia cornfield— much lighter and THE LABOUR-PROCESS 197 We now see, that the difference between labour, considered on the one hand as producing utilities, and on the other hand, as creating value, a difference which we discovered by our anal- ysis of a commodity, resolves itself into a distinction between two aspects of the process of production. 1 Cf. F. The purchase of labour-power for a fixed period is the prelude to the process of production; and this prelude is constantly repeat- ed when the stipulated term comes to an end, when a definite pe- riod of production, such as a week or a month, has elapsed. * Capitalist production, therefore, under its aspect of a contin- uous connected process, of a process of reproduction, produces not only commodities, not only surplus-value, but it also produces and reproduces the capitalist relation; on the one side the capital- ist, on the other the wage-labourer. By E. The act of exchange gives to the commodity con- verted into money, not its value, but its specific value-form. — M. of Fact., 31st Oct., 1865," p. Since, however, manu- facture carries this social separation of branches of labour much further, and also, by its peculiar division, attacks the individual at the very roots of his life, it is the first to afford the materials for, and to give a start to, industrial pathology. 1 The two phases, each inverse to the other, that make up the metamorphosis of a commodity constitute together a circular movement, a circuit: commodity-form, stripping off of this form, and return to the commodity-form. In what follows the chief combi- nations alone are considered. Money, the final term of the first transmutation, is at the same time the starting-point for the second. c. 1 Let us now examine production as a creation of value. 538 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION recognised that the change in the relations of demand and supply explained in regard to the price of labour, as of all other commodi- ties, nothing except its changes, i.e., the oscillations of the market- price above or below a certain mean. 2 Nevertheless, this density is more or less relative. "Value"— (i.e., exchange-value) "is a property of things, riches"— (i.e., use-value) "of man. Part II, p. 232. II, p. Moderate though he be, yet some few wants he has to satisfy, and must therefore do a little useful work of various sorts, such as making tools and furniture, taming goats, fishing and hunting. It is no part of us as objects. . 2 In England women are still occasionally used instead of horses for hauling canal boats, 3 because the labour required to produce horses and machines is an accurately known quantity, while that required to maintain the women of the surplus-population is below all calculation. But in no case would his surplus-product arise from some- occult quality inherent in human labour. a day. lxvii., n. There are, be- sides, all the various industries that supply the cattle-breeder, the tanner, and the shoemaker with the means of production. The function of money as the means of payment implies a contradiction without a terminus medius. And why? Receiving a refusal, he at first kept quiet. 7me Dis. Merivale, formerly Professor of Political Economy at Oxford, subsequently employed in the English Colonial Office, "suppose that, on the occasion of some of these crises, the nation were to rouse itself to the effort of getting rid 634 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION by emigration of some hundreds of thousands of superfluous arms, what would be the consequence? The definition of constant capital given above by no means excludes the possibility of a change of value in its elements. The master can sell him, bequeath him, let him out on hire as a slave, just as any other personal chattel or cattle. It is dangerous, because it makes them independent." ("Children's Empl. But in fact, the term £90 var. By doing this we shall, at the same time, solve the riddle presented by money. 67.) West is the author of the anonymous "Essay on the Application of Capita] to Land. . A single commodity, the linen, appears therefore to have acquired the character of direct exchangeability with every other commodity because, and in so far as, this charac- ter is denied to every other commodity. But this difference between the instrument as a whole and its daily wear and tear, is much greater in a machine than in a tool, because the machine, being made from more durable material, has a longer life; because its employment, being regulated by strictly scien- tific laws, allows of greater economy in the wear and tear of its parts, and in the materials it consumes; and lastly, because its totally different things. to-rd., as every piece now 1 1 1 only represents-^- instead of — of a working-hour. When business is brisk, the labour frequently lasts from 8 or even 6 o'clock in the morning till 10, 11, or 12 o'clock at night. COMPULSORY LIMITATION BY LAW OF THE WORKING-TIME. The higher wages draw a larger part of the working population into the more favoured sphere, until it is glutted with labour-power, and wages at length fall again to their average level or below it, if the pres- sure is too great. First, by the physical bounds of labour-power. 68.) 2 Nevertheless, the manufacturing system, in many branches oi indus- try, attains this result but very imperfectly, because it knows not how to control with certainty the general chemical and physical conditions ol the process of production. But if you consume 1 1 it in 10 years, you pay me daily 1Q95Q instead of^^-of its total value, i.e., only -^ of its daily value, and you rob me, therefore, 2 every day of -^ of the value of my commodity. work for them; and it would place such labourers, not in an abject or servile condition, but in such a state of easy and liberal dependence as all who know human nature, and its history, will allow to be necessary for their own comfort." 1 Sir F. "A strong south-west wind blows over the whole country for 8 or 9 months in the year, bringing with it torrents of rain, which discharge princi- pally upon the western slopes of the hills. 1 Here we have the machine, but only as an elementary factor of production by machinery. 56, &c. That a capitalist should command on the field of production, is now as indispensa- ble as that a general should command on the field of battle. 2 Since, on the one hand, the values of the variable capital and of the labour-power purchased by that capital are equal, and the value of this labour-power determines the necessary portion of the working-day; and since, on the other hand, the 1 In this work, we have, up to now, employed the term "necessary labour-time," to designate the time necessary under given social conditions for the production of any commodity. If this state of things lasts for some time, and extends, there follows a discharge of workmen employed in the production of these commodities. 285, 289, p. At first then, C=c-fv: for example, if £500 is the capital advanced, its components may be such that the £500 =£410 const. Straw-hat and bonnet-making: 1851, 20,393: 1861, 18,176. And while the sum of them is of terrible magnitude against life, the mere scantiness of food is in itself of very serious moment These are painful reflections, especially when it is remembered that the poverty to which they advert is not the deserved poverty of idleness. All surplus-value, whatever particular form (profit, interest, or rent), it may subsequently crystallise into, is in sub- stance the materialisation of unpaid labour. I return to this in the 2nd volume, as well as to the Blue books that have appeared since 1867 on the position of the English land labourers. He has bought the use of the labour-power for a definite period, and he insists upon his rights. I am always very much tired when I have done at night. The landlord in his capacity of mine-owner invites an industrial colony to labour on his estate, and then in his capacity of surface-owner makes it impossible that the labourers whom he collects, should find proper lodging where they must live. there are ten persons .... 2 It is one of the greatest merits of Ricardo to have seen in machinery not only the means of producing commodities, but of creating a "redundant population.** 408 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION of capital. But the labourer is not paid until after he has expended his labour-power, and realised in commodities not only its value, but surplus-value. The maximum loss of value that they can suffer in the process, is plainly limit- ed by the amount of the original value with which they came into the process, or in other words, by the labour-time necessary for their production. Transition from the General form of value to the Money-form The universal equivalent form is a form of value in general. The work of directing, superintending, and adjusting, becomes one of the functions of capital, from the moment that the labour under the control of capital, becomes co-operative. reminds one of the secret revolutionary associations which prepared the French peo- ple for the events of 1789.... Ed.. a-week. MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 355 ence the cyclopean machines now employed in the construction of prime movers. However, there is a great difference in the way the two metals occur in the quartz lodes. And just as during their lifetime, that is to say, during the con- tinued labour-process in which they serve, they retain their shape independent of the product, so, too, they do after their death. His report is incorporated with the "Sixth Report on Public Health. "Wie menschlich von solch grossem Herrn!" From Table E we saw that, during 1864, of £4,368,610 of total profits, three surplus-value makers pocketed only £262,610; that in 1865, however, out of £4,669,979 total profits, the same three virtuosi of "abstinence" pocketed £274,448; in 1864, 26 surplus-value makers reached to £646,377; in 1865, 28 surplus- value makers reached to £736,448; in 1864, 121 surplus-value mak- ers, £1,066,912; in 1865, 186 surplus-value makers, £1,320,996; in 1864, 1,131 surplus-value makers £2,150,818, nearly half of the total annual proflt;in 1865, 1,194 surplus-value makers, £2,418,933, more than half of the. The iron, in the expres- sion of the weight of the sugar-loaf, represents a natural property common to both bodies, namely their weight; but the coat, in the expression of value of the linen, represents a non-natural property of both, something purely social, namely, their value. 2 Here I merely cast a hurried glance over the conditions of their dwellings. So far, therefore, as his actions are a mere function of capital — endowed as capital is, in his person, with consciousness and a will— his own private consumption is a robbery perpetrated on ac- cumulation, just as in book-keeping by double entry, the private expenditure of the capitalist is placed on the debtor side of his account against his capital. ... As soon, therefore, as the labourers learn the secret, how it comes to pass that in the same measure as they work more, as they produce more wealth for others, and as the productive power of their labour increases, so in the same measure even their function as a means of the self- expansion of capital becomes more and more precarious for them; as soon as they discover that the degree of intensity of the compe- tition among themselves depends wholly on the pressure of the relative surplus-population; as soon as, by Trades' Unions, &c, they try to organise a regular co-operation between employed and unemployed in order to destroy or to weaken the ruinous effects of this natural law of capitalistic production on their class, so soon capital and its sycophant, Political Economy, cry out at the infringement of the "eternal" and so to say "sacred" law of supply and demand. Smith's days, and was repeated in various works down to the beginning of the 19th century; a theory which Malthus, that master in plagiarism (the whole of his population theory is a shameless plagiarism), appropriated to himself in 1815; which West developed at the same time as, and independently of, Anderson; which in the year 1817 was connected by Ricardo with the general theory of value, then made the round of the world as Ricardo's theory, and in 1820 was vulgarised by James Mill, the father of John Stuart Mill; and which, finally, was reproduced by John Stuart Mill and others, as a dogma already quite commonplace, and known to every schoolboy. As the national debt finds its support in the public revenue, which must cover the yearly payments for interest, &c, the modern system of taxation was the necessary complement of the system of national loans. 48.) 340 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION manner incompatible with the nature of castes, to ossify them into guilds. The women who keep the "mis- tresses' houses" are themselves poor. These cottages are known as "hinds' houses." They are let to the la- bourers in consideration of certain feudal services, under a contract called "bondage," which, amongst other things, binds the labourer, during the time he is employed elsewhere, to leave some one, say his daughter, &c, to supply his place. 165, 166.) THE GENERAL FORMULA FOR CAPITAL 153 is what he aims at. He sells his yarn at eighteenpence a pound, which is its exact value. Accumulation and the concentration accompanying it are, therefore, not only scattered over many points, but the increase of each functioning capital is thwarted by the formation of new and the sub-division of old capitals. In the one case both the starting-point and the goal are commodi- ties, in the other they are money. Money as a measure of value JL J_s the phenomenal form that must of necessity be assumed by that measure of value which is immanent in commodities, laboUr-fcrmeT^ 1 The question — Why does not money directly represent labour-time, so that a piece of paper may represent, for instance, x hours' labour, is at bottom the same as the question why, given the production of commodities, must products take the form of commodities? 1. This "flesh and blood" were, therefore, "their money." Hence, the Shylock-law of the Ten Tables. For the latter, the cost of appren- ticeship vanishes; for the former, it diminishes, compared with that of artificers, in consequence of the functions being simplified. A smaller proportion of what he produces is sufficient to put that labour into motion, and a larger proportion 1 consequently re- mains for himself." ("Outlines of Pol. SECTION 5.— THE CAPITALISTIC CHARACTER OF MANUFACTURE An increased number of labourers under the control of one capitalist is the natural starting-point, as well of co-operation generally, as of manufacture in particular. c. If this means that the number of actual sales is equal to the number of purchases, it is mere tautology. The circulating medium was transformed into a hoard, because the process stopped short after the first phase, because the converted shape of the commodity, viz., the money, was withdrawn from circulation. 117, 118. Sixth Report of the Medical Officer of the Privy Council, 1863." Published in London 1864. 416 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION "The great improvements made in machines of every kind have raised their productive power very much. Empl. The inter- mediate pauses are shortened, in which accumulation works as simple extension of production, on a given technical basis. c, Evidence, pp. 300) which English legislation called into life by means of the mutually conflicting Fac- tory Acts, the Factory Acts Extension Act and the Workshops' Act, finally became intolerable, and thus all legislative enactments on this subject were codified in the Factory and Workshop Act of 1878. He came to work every day in the week at 6 a. 269.) 214 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION imaginable. The mistresses take orders from manufacturers, or from warehousemen, and employ as many women, girls, and young children as the size of their rooms and the fluctuating demand of the business will allow. . Since the magnitude of the value of a commodity represents only the quantity of labour embodied in it, it follows that all commodities, when taken in certain proportions, must be equal in value. or Is. 6d. The labourer here is, to use a striking expression of the ancients, distinguishable only as instrumentum vocale, from an ani- mal as instrumentum semi-vocale, and from an implement as instrumentum mutum. The labour-process, turned into the process by which the capitalist consumes labour-power, exhibits two characteristic phenomena. The more revolting the occupation, the more certain it is to receive the minimum of remuneration... The appearance of independence is kept up by means of a constant change of employers, and by the fictio juris of a contract. Being poles they are as necessarily opposite as they are connected. 113.) 2 "The employments, placed under restriction, were connected with the manufacture of textile fabrics by the aid of steam or water-power. Formerly, the peasant family produced the means of subsistence and the raw materials, which they themselves, for the most part, consumed. His stock-book contains a list of the objects of utility that belong to him, of the operations necessary for their production; and last- ly, of the labour-time that definite quantities of those objects have, on an average, cost him. represent the 4s. . Its force increases with the accumulation of capital. Here the par- ticular and natural form of labour, and not, as in a society based on production of commodities, its general abstract form is the immediate social form of labour. A surgeon officially appointed must certify their age. Of these 3 half-hours, one yields 1/23X^H5,000=«£5,000; i.e., it makes up for the wear and tear of the machinery; the remaining 2 half-hours, i.e., the last hour, yield 2/23 X<£1 15,000=^10,000 or the net profit. On the one hand, the imme- diate effect of machinery is to increase the supply of raw mate- rial in the same way, for example, as the cotton gin augmented the production of cotton. Fawcett, Professor of Political Economy at Cambridge. "If the wealth of a nation," he remarks, "could be decupled by a proclamation, it were strange that such proclamations have not long since been made by our Governors." (1. (he means leave off the consumption of "our" labour-power machines), so that we (ite- rum Grispinus) are really working over-time the whole year round For all these, children and adults alike (152 children and young persons and 140 adults), the average work for the last 18 months has been at the very least 7 days, 5 hours, or 78^- hours a week. This family received relief from the workhouse, and it furnished them with just one scanty meal per day. But the employment of machinery does away with the necessity of crys- tallising this distribution after the manner of Manufacture, by the constant annexation of a particular man to a particular function. 3, the justices of the peace were empowered to fix certain wages and to modify them according to the time of the year and the price of commodities. Nevertheless, the elementary form of value passes by an easy transition into a more complete form. than with the girls in the fac- MACHINERY AND MODERN INDUSTRY 499 tories." (n. We limit ourselves therefore to a few points characteristic of time-wages. In short, it is a means for- producing surplus-value. This accidental repartition gets repeated, develops advantages of its own, and gradually ossifies into a systematic division of labour. An instrument of labour is a thing, or a complex of things, which the labourer interposes between himself and the subject of his labour, and which serves as the conductor of his activity. 1 The following shows the debtor and creditor relations existing be- tween English traders at the beginning of the 18th century. Compare, for example, England with India, or in ancient times, Athens and Corinth with the shores of the Black Sea. . But since an umbrella is a mixtum compositum of very heterogeneous parts, by degrees these parts became the products of various separate industries, carried on independently in different places. "On Machinery." 2 Nota bene. As arts are cultivated, and civilisation is extended, fixed capital bears a larger and larger proportion to circulating capital. Children of 8 might, if they began work at noon, be employed from 12 to 1, 1 hour; from 2 to 4 in the afternoon, \ 2 hours; from 5 to 8.30 in the evening, 3— hours; in all, the le- 1 gal 6^ hours. "The worst is that the brickmakers despair of themselves. xix.) 2 For instance, abnormal development of some muscles, curvature of bones, &c. I continue, how- ever, to receive about the usual number of complaints that half, or three-quarters of an hour in the day, are snatched from the workers by encroaching upon the times professedly allowed for rest and refreshment." 4 The same phenomenon was reproduced on a smaller scale during the frightful cotton-crisis from 1861 to 1865. But soon such a cloud of dust in the way of petitions from the masters overwhelmed the Home Secretary, Sir George Grey, that in a circular of August 5th, 1848, he recommends the inspectors not "to lay informations 1 The nature of capital remains the same in its developed as in its undeveloped form. . The Duchess, in the nobility of her heart, actually went so far as to let these at an average rent of 2s. The next point for our consideration is, what portion of the value of the yarn is added to the cotton by the labour of the spinner. there may be an extreme on the other side. The life of modern industry becomes a series of periods of moderate ac- tivity, prosperity, over-production, crisis and stagnation. It forms now a part of the constant capital of the master manufacturer. c. But if a number of carriages are being made simultaneously, some may be in the hands of the gilders while othtTS are going through an earlier process. But the increased size of the gearing was too much for the water-power, which had now become insufficient, and this was one of the circumstances that led to a more accurate investigation of the laws of friction. c, p. This part of capital is continually being transformed from a constant into a variable magnitude. 10, known as Sir John Hobhouse s Factory Act, it was forbidden to any owner of a cotton-spinning or weaving mill, or the father, son, or brother of such owner, to act as Justice of the Peace in any inquiries that concerned the Factory Act. In this way East India was compelled to pro- duce cotton, wool, hemp, jute, and indigo for Great Britain. Lastly, in the case of in- terest-bearing capital, the circulation M — C — M' appears abridged. oi Nations," London, 1821, p. If he [Ricardo] allowed that when A rises in value relatively to B, B falls in value relatively to A, he cut away the ground on which he rested his grand propo- sition, that the value of a commodity is ever determined by the labour em- bodied in it; for if a change in the cost of A alters not only its own value in relation to B, for which it is exchanged, but also the value of B relatively to that of A, though no change has taken place in the quantity of labour to produce B, then not only the doctrine falls to the ground which asserts that the quantity of labour bestowed on an article regulates its value, but also that which affirms the cost of an article to regulate its value." (J Broadhurst: "Political Economy," London, 1842, pp. B. John Bright's assertion that 150 landlords own half of England, and 12 half the Scotch soil, has never been refuted. 118. CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO CAPITAL 607 power of labour takes the appearance of an intrinsic property of capital, in which it is incorporated, just as the productive forces of social labour take the appearance of inherent properties of capital, and as the constant appropriation of surplus-labour by the capitalists, takes that of a constant self-expansion of capital. But in this respect the material fac- tors of the labour-process do not all behave alike. Hence, the historical movement which changes the producers into wage-workers, appears, on the one hand, as their emancipation from serfdom and from the fetters of the guilds, and this side alone exists for our bourgeois historians. The different kinds of labour, such as tillage, cattle tending, spinning, weaving and making clothes, which result in the various products, are in them- selves, and such as they are, direct social functions, because func- tions of the family, which, just as much as a society based on the production of commodities, possesses a spontaneously devel- oped system of division of labour. 104.) "Le credit commer- cial a du commencer au moment ou l'ouvrier, premier artisan de la produc- tion, a pu, au moyen de ses economies, attendre le salaire de son travail jusqu' a la fin de la semaine, de la quinzaine, du mois, du trimestre, &.c." (Ch. Ga- nilh: "Des Systemes d'Econ. And for what is the gold exchanged? Let the necessary labour-time be 6 hours, or the value of labour-power 3 shillings; also let the surplus-labour be 6 hours or the surplus-value 3 shillings. The owner makes up for this lack in the commodity of a sense of the concrete, by his own five and more senses. In the potteries the Factory Act of 1864 "has whitewashed and cleansed upwards of 200 workshops, after a period of abstinence from any such cleaning, in many cases of 20 years, and in some, entirely," (this is the "abstinence" of the capitalist!) "in which were employed 27,800 artisans, hitherto breathing through protracted days and often nights of labour, a mephitic atmosphere, and which ren- dered an otherwise comparatively innocuous occupation, preg- nant with disease and death. In the centre of a square surrounded by rows of cottages, an engine- house was built and the engine connected by shafts with the looms in the cottages. Because it is value, it has acquired the occult quality of being able to add value to itself. 1866, app., pp. m., in making up. In Answer to Mr. Locke's Con- siderations," «&c, London, 1696, pp. On the other hand, the labourer turns the money paid to him for his labour-power, into means of subsistence: this is his individu- al consumption. We do not find the production at all interfered with; in short, we produce more in the same time." 1 It is evident that the English legislature, which certainly no one will venture to reproach with being overdosed with genius, has been led by experience to the conclusion that a simple compulsory law is sufficient to enact away all the so-called impediments, opposed by the nature of the process, to the restriction and regulation of the working-day. In those industries where the Factory Act proper (not the Print Works Act referred to in the text) has been in force for some time, tn,e obstacles in the way of the education clauses have, in recent years, been overcome. 1845," praises Bar- bon for this anticipation, but prudently passes over the naive forms, in which Barbon clothes the absurd supposition on which the "currency principle" is based. "My attention," says an English factory inspector, "was drawn to an advertisement in the local paper of one of the most important manufacturing towns of my district, of which the fol- lowing is a copy: Wanted, 12 to 20 young persons, not younger than what can pass for 13 years. If its owner therefore offers it for sale at three shillings a day, its selling price is equal to its value, and according to our supposition, our friend Money- bags, who is intent upon converting his three shillings into capi- tal, pays this value. A third owner of commodi- 1 S. 3.) "Wages are decreased in the same proportion as the powers of production increase. without any variation in the price of la- bour. He must produce surplus-value. In the second place, it is a many-coloured mosaic of disparate and independent expressions of value. On the other hand, these men, suddenly dragged from their wonted mode of life, could not as suddenly adapt them- selves to the discipline of their new condition. 'Certainly by all honest means it is,' we answer. by far the best grazing ground in the wide district of Badenoch; a part of the Black Mount forest was the best pasture for black-faced sheep in Scotland. 232, 233. In other words, a sale is a purchase, C — M is also M— C. With adequate profit, capital is very bold. Modern Industry alone, and finally, sup- plies, in machinery, the lasting basis of capitalistic agriculture, expropriates radically the enormous majority of the agricultural 1 "Twenty pounds of wool converted unobtrusively into the yearly cloth- ing oi a labourer's family by its ownindustryin the intervals of other work — this makes no show; but bring it to market, send it to the factory, thence to the broker, thence to the dealer, and you will have great commercial opera- tions, and nominal capital engaged to the amount of twenty times its value.... These people are so exhausted after the day's hard work, that neither the rules of health, of cleanliness, nor of decency are in the least observed. The same causes which develop the expansive power of capital, develop also the labour- power at its disposal. Mr. Villiers, despite the best of intentions on his part, was "le- gally" obliged to refuse the requests of the manufacturers. c, p. c, p. Now it is evident that the circuit M — C — M would be absurd and without meaning if the intention were to exchange by this means two equal sums of money, £100 for £100. . THE GENERAL LAW OP CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 709 in towns, remain agricultural labourers, and are constantly sent back to the country districts in search of work. c , p. The product therefore of one of the former hours has as much or more value than has the product of W of the latter hours. After the fruitfulness of the Irish soil had been praised from 1815 to 1846, and proclaimed loudly as by Nature herself destined for the cultivation of wheat, English agronomists, economists, politicians, discover suddenly that it is good for nothing but to produce forage. "From a gen- eral compilation of wages allowed to the labourers in different trades, it follows that the highest average of daily wage is 1 franc 56c, for men, 89 centimes for women, 56 centimes for boys, and 55 centimes for girls. of cotton, value 20s., and spindle worn away, 4s.): it is therefore constant capital. What a splendid result of the capitalist exploitation of machinery! SECTION 7.— REPULSION AND ATTRACTION OF WORKPEOPLE BY THE FACTORY SYSTEM. X., Section 5). A Mecklen- burg. The more intense national labour, therefore, as compared with the less intense, produces in the same time more value, which expresses itself in more money. 2.) 1 It will be seen from the following quotation from my book which appeared in 1859, why I take no notice in the text of an opposite form: MONEY, OR THE CIRCULATION OF COMMODITIES 137 The obligations falling due within a given period, represent the sum of the prices of the commodities, the sale of which gave rise to those obligations. Of the lat- ter 13-^- lbs. So far as division of labour re-appears in the factory, it is primarily a distribution of the workmen among the specialised machines; and of masses of workmen, not however organised into groups, among the various departments of the factory, in each of which they work at a number of similar machines placed together; their co-operation, therefore, is only simple. . d. The labour-process, resolved as above into its simple elemen- tary factors, is human action with a view to the production of use-values, appropriation of natural substances to human re- quirements; it is the necessary condition for effecting exchange 184 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION of matter between man and Nature; it is the everlasting Nature- imposed condition of human existence, and therefore is inde- pendent of every social phase of that existence, or rather, is com- mon to every such phase. Some of the principal manufacturers in the trade urged that in consequence of the nature of the materials used, and their various processes, they would be unable, without serious loss, to stop for meal-times at any given moment. 114, 115, n. For his maintenance he requires a given quantity of the means of sub- sistence. And though the use-value of a commodity is more serviceable to the buyer than to the seller, its money-form is more serviceable to the seller. 8, 9. — the labourers are sometimes repelled, sometimes attracted again in greater masses, the number of those employed increasing on the whole, although in a constantly de- creasing proportion to the scale of production. There are two circumstances that finally turn the scale: first, the constantly recurring experience that capital, so soon as it finds itself subject to legal control at one point, compen- sates itself all the more recklessly at other points; 2 secondly, the cry of the capitalists for equality in the conditions of compe- tition, i.e., for equal restrain on all exploitation of labour. 26, n 125, p. . On Rente London, 1831, P- 191 -) 2 "La lorza di ciascuno uomo e minima, ma la riunione delle minime forze forma una forza totale maggiore anche della somma delle forze mede- si me fino a che le forze per essere ri unite possono diminuere il tempo ed accres- cere lo spazio della loro azione." (G. In 1832, the spinner put up on each mule 2,200 stretches, making a total of 4,400. That which is new is the intelligence and the humanity which remedies them." ("History of England," vol. The "pleasant difficulties" thus self-created by the Bank of England, are well known. Hence, the pro- ductive power developed by the labourer when working in co-oper- ation, is the productive power of capital. 2 2 " 4. The ship- wrights of the port of London work by the job or piece, while those of all other parts work by the day." 2 In the same saddlery shops of London, often for the same work, piece-wages are paid to the French, time-wages to the Eng- lish. Generally the gang- master pays up in a public house; then he returns home at the head of the procession reeling drunk, propped up right and left by a stalwart virago, while children and young persons bring up the rear, boisterous, and singing chaffing and bawdy songs. Mr. White, however, has a good memory. Half the workmen ... Mr. Tucker. has no occasion to exert his understanding. Ferguson, 1. These same mothers often make them work at home, after school is over, till 10, 11, and 12 o'clock at night. It loses exchange-value, either by machines of the same sort being pro- duced cheaper than it, or by better machines entering into competi- tion with it. Here the thing produced by each of them is but a step towards the final form, which is the product of all their labours combined. 1 2 Salt Pie Street (bottom) . c, p. Although there is no absolute change in the value of labour-power, it suffers a relative fall. But its total amount varies with the du- ration of the surplus-labour. Given the difference between the value of the machinery, and the value transferred by it in a day to the product, the extent to which this latter value makes the product dearer, depends in the first instance, upon the size of the product; so to say, upon its area. They are the light infantry of capital, thrown by it, according to its needs, now to this point, now to that. . E. It only brings it to a close, by stepping in as the absolute form of existence of exchange-value, or as the universal commodity. Even an ordinary and optimist Free-trader, like Mr. Molinari, goes so far as to say, "Un homme s'use plus vite en surveillant, 3uinze heures par jour, revolution uniforme d'un mecanisme, qu'en exercant, ans le meme espace de temps, sa force physique. a. But as we have seen, during that portion of his day's labour in which he produces the value of his labour-power, say three shil- lings, he produces only an equivalent for the value of his labour- power already advanced 2 by the capitalist; the new value created only replaces the variable capital advanced. There the movements of the instrument of labour proceed from him, here it is the move- ments of the machine that he must follow. He has become a slave-dealer. To discover the various uses of things is the work of history. Hence, pro- duction here is independent of that division of labour brought about, in Indian society as a whole, by means of the exchange of commodities. On the other hand, that part of capital, represented by labour-power, does, in the process of production, undergo an alteration of value. 2 Destutt de Tracy, 1. 17, 862 and 17, 863.) 2 Ure, I. The brilliancy of Aristotle's genius is shown by this alone, that he discovered, in the expression of the value of commodities, a relation of equality. These estates were given away, sold at a ridiculous figure, or even annexed to private estates by direct seizure. lOd. or 2s. The wage-labourer loses into the bargain, along with the relation of dependence, also the sentiment of dependence on the abstemious capitalist. They are seen standing in the various stages of nat- ural decay. =3s., and in like manner 48 by -j-d. LEGISLATION AGAINST THE EXPROPRIATED 737 Paris. Capital now entered upon a preliminary campaign in order to hinder the Act from coming into full force on May 1st, 1848. c, p. c, p. Edward VI.: A statute of the first year of his reign, 1547, ordains that if anyone refuses to work, he shall be condemned as a slave to the person who has denounced him as an idler. 8 Child. In 1858 the official value of cotton goods exported, was £182,221,681; but the real or marketable value was only £43,001,322, being a ten-fold quantity sold for little more than double the former price. Marx. I. If the exploitation of the labourers already employed do not increase, either extensively or intensively, then additional labour-power must be found. 62-63.) 420 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION an autocrat. "The work of a London journeyman baker begins, as a rule, at about eleven at night. It was made a rule in the inquiry to select in each cate- gory the most healthy families, and those comparatively in the best circumstances. 5d.; their total income, £29 18s.; deficit made good by the par- ish, £6 14s. 2 "Ch. Empl. She assigned to the expelled inhabitants about 6,000 acres on the sea-shore — 2 acres per family. Scullery: 8 ft. With regard to this subject, we may notice two methods characteristic of apologetic economy. 2 Rep., &c, for 30th April, 1850. of cotton are consumed weekly, of which 600 lbs. For the capitalist, however, this use is still more limited. This suited the mode of explanation in favour during the 18th century. On the other hand, la- bour may give us its product in such a form, that we can use it only as raw material, as is the case with cotton, thread, and yarn. The transactions in the market effectuate only the interchange of the individual components of this annual prod- uct, transfer them from one hand to another, but can neither aug- ment the total annual production, nor alter the nature of the objects produced. Englishmen, always well up in the Bible, knew well enough that man, unless by elective grace a capitalist, or landlord, or sinecurist, is commanded to eat his bread in the sweat of his brow, but they did not know that he had to eat daily in his bread a certain quantity of human per- spiration mixed with the discharge of abscesses, cobwebs, dead black-beetles, and putrid German yeast, without counting alum, sand, and other agreeable mineral ingredients. per week. 3 "Tendency to Factory System" (1. c.) How very "skilful" is this "anatomico-physiological method" of Political Economy, which, "indeed," converts a mere desire "after all" into a source of value. Plainly, by the quantity of the value-creating substance, the labour, contained in the article. The "full-priced" denounced their rivals before the Parliamentary Committee of Inquiry: "They only exist now by first defrauding the public, and next getting 18 hours' work out of their men for 12 hours' wages.... It must be borne in mind, that we are now dealing with the production of commodities, and that, up to this point, we have only considered one aspect of the process. is a produc- tive consumer to the person who employs him, and to the State, but not, strictly speaking, to himself." (Malthus 1 "Definitions, &c," p. Many cots and little gardens here. From one standpoint, any distinction between absolute and relative surplus-value appears illusory. 2 "There is a certain density of population which is convenient, both tor social intercourse, and for that combination ot powers by which the prod- uce of labour is increased." (James Mill, I. Every one knows that there are no real forests in England. They are, however, commodities, only because they are something two-fold, both objects of utility, and, at the same time, depositories of value. c, p. This is the place to return to one of the grand exploits of eco- nomic apologetics. 1751.) "They often work day and night, wet through to the skin, their constitution undermined and their health ruined." "You have not inquired into that subject perhaps?" "I have certainly taken note of it as I have gone along, and certainly I have seen nothing parallel to the effects of the employment of women on the pit bank. The fact, that in the particular form of production with which we are dealing, viz., the production of commodities, the spe- cific social character of private labour carried on independently, consists in the equality of every kind of that labour, by virtue of its being human labour, which character, therefore, assumes in the product the form of value — this fact appears to the produc- ers, notwithstanding the discovery above referred to, to be just as real and final, as the fact, that, after the discovery by science of the component gases of air, the atmosphere itself remained unaltered. Here, instead of the independent man, we find everyone dependent, serfs and lords, vassals and suzerains, laymen and clergy. Just as, with time- wages, it does not matter whether we assume that the labourer works 6 hours for himself and 6 hours for the capitalist, or half of every hour for himself, and the other half for the capitalist, so here it does not matter whether we say that each individual piece is half paid, and half unpaid for, or that the price of 12 pieces is the equivalent only of the value of the labour-power, whilst in the other 12 pieces surplus-value is incorporated. . Independently of the limits of the actual increase of population, it creates, for the changing needs of the self-expansion of capital, a mass of human mate- rial always ready for exploitation. The great part that the public debt, and the fiscal system corresponding with it, has played in the capitalisation of wealth and the expropriation of the masses, has led many writers, like Gobbett, Doubleday and others, to seek in this, Incorrectly, the fundamental cause of the misery of the modern peoples. 196.) 330 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION bour-powers, or the amount of the wages of these labourers for a day, or a week, as the case may be, must be ready in the pocket of the capitalist, before the workmen are assembled for the proc- ess of production. * Ure, 1. 1816.) IV. The same is the case with the steam-hammer mentioned above. c, p. When in currency, they wear away even more rapidly than gold coins. The rest of the week's work was made up as follows: — Wednesday, 1 15 hours; Thursday, 15 hours 35 minutes; Friday, 14— hours; Saturday, 14 hours 10 minutes, making a total for the week of 88 hours 40 minutes. So far as regards value, that relation is limited to this, that the commodity contains a quantity of his own labour, that quantity being measured by a definite social standard. Besides these material differences of their use-values, there is only one other difference between commodi- ties, namely, that between their bodily form and the form into which they are converted by sale, the difference between commodi- ties and money. The supply of wage-labour, he complains, is neither constant, nor regular, nor sufficient. m., was forbidden for all persons between 9 and 18. 4,669,979 divided among 18,081 persons. In merchants' capital, the two extremes, the money that is thrown upon the market, and the augmented money that is withdrawn from the market, are at least connected by a purchase and a sale, in other words by the movement of the circulation. Ortes says, 1 c, p. The price then, is merely the money-name of the quantity of social labour realised in his commodity. In capitalist society spare time is acquired for one class by converting the whole life-time of the masses into labour-time. 2 Mr. White, a commissioner, visited a military clothing manufactory that employed 1,000 to 1,200 persons, almost all females, and a shoe manufac- tory with 1,300 persons; of these nearly one half were children and young persons. I would instance the lifting of a large tree on to a wain ... c. The value of commodity A, is qualitatively expressed, by the fact that commodity B is directly exchangeable with it. He let them into the town in 1641. Times, Feb. We followed up this false appearance to its final establishment, which is complete so soon as the universal equivalent form becomes identified with the bodily form of a particular commodity, and thus crystal- lised into the money-form. But the value of every commodity is determined by the labour-time requisite to turn it out so as to be of normal quality. Because this power costs capital nothing, and because, on the oth- er hand, the labourer himself does not develop it before his la- bour belongs to capital, it appears as a power with which capital is endowed by Nature— a productive power that is immanent in capital. on the stretch to economise time and labour." (Dugald Stewart: Works ed. In his "The State of the Poor, or an History of the Labouring Classes in England, &c," Sir F. By Noblesse Oblige." London, 1879.— F. 520 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION development in the conditions of production. So that you are altogether too sanguine, in expecting that by such an addition of I-5- hours to the working-day, the rate will rise from 100% to 200% and more, in other words that it will be "more than dou- bled." On the other hand— man's heart is a wonderful thing, especially when carried in the purse— you take too pessimist a view, when you fear, that with a reduction of the hours of la- bour from 11— to 10, the whole of your net profit will go to the dogs. The amount of exploitation is here measured by 5 hours. This is a superior class of workmen, some of them scientifically educated, others brought up to a trade; it is distinct from the factory operative class, and merely aggregated to it. Secondly, this division of labour is a particular sort of co- operation, and many of its disadvantages spring from the general character of co-operation, and not from this particular form of it. It is in this sense that Franklin says, "war is robbery, commerce is generally cheat- ing." 2 If the transformation of merchants' money into cap- ital is to be explained otherwise than by the producers being simply cheated, a long series of intermediate steps would be necessary, which, at present, when the simple circulation of commodities forms our only assumption, are entirely want- ing. P. The young servant girls in the houses of the London lower middle class are in common parlance called "slaveys." 1 Ganilh, on the contrary, considers the final result of the factory system to be an absolutely less number of operatives, at whose expense an increased number of "gens honnetes" live and develop their well-known "perfectibilite perfectible." Little as he understands the movement of production, at least he feels, that machinery must needs be a very fatal institution, if its introduc- tion converts busy workmen into paupers, and its development calls more slaves of labour into existence than it has suppressed. l Whether 20 yards of linen =1 coat or =20 coats or=x coats— that is, whether a given quantity of linen is worth few or many i The few economists, amongst whom is S. Answer: the difficulty is met by calling use-value, exchange-value, if you please. l We have seen that even in the case of simple reproduction, all capital, whatever its original source, becomes converted into accumulated capital, capitalised surplus-value. Education, of course, they get none. "(Storch: "Cours d'Econ. The weaver is merely a detached in- dividual, working a web when ordered of a customer, and with a loom of the rudest construction, consisting sometimes of a few branches or bars of wood, put roughly together. One article must be bought or paid for daily, another weekly, another quarterly, and so on. corn-value, cloth- value, according to the commodity with which it is compared; and hence there are a thousand different kinds of value, as many kinds of value as there are commodities in existence, and all are equally real and equally nomi- nal." ("A Critical Dissertation on the Nature, Measures and Causes of Value: chiefly in reference to the writings of Mr. Ricardo and his followers." By the author of "Essays on the Formation, &c, of Opinions." London, 1825, p. In order that the mass of money, actually current, may constantly saturate the absorbing power of the circulation, it is necessary that the quantity of gold and silver in a country be greater than the quan- tity required to function as coin. c, p. Those values that were previously expressed by the price of £1 would now be expressed by the price of £2. COMMODITIES 55 In fact, when a person exchanges his linen for many other commodities, and thus expresses its value in a series of other commodities, it necessarily follows, that the various owners of the latter exchange them for the linen, and consequently express the value of their various commodities in one and the same third commodity, the linen. ... more than on weekly wages, yet it is found, on calculating his total income, that his loss of employ- ment, during the year, outweighs this gain... And yet we have seen that simple reproduction suffices to stamp this first operation, in so far as it is conceived as an isolated process, with a totally changed character. In truth, we shall also find that in relation to the arts and handicrafts, they have outstripped their rivals more than a master does a bungler; and the contrivances for maintaining the monarchy and the other institutions of DIVISION OF LABOUR AND MANUFACTURE 367 continued to have this importance to the Greeks of the Roman Empire. —The working miners want a law for the compulsory education of their children, as in factories. x Although the working-day is not a fixed, but a fluent quan- tity, it can, on the other hand, only vary within certain limits. On getting outside a young fellow came running after us, and asked us to step inside his house and see if anything could be done for him. Abbe Lancellotti, in a work that appeared in Venice in 1636, but which was written in 1579, says as follows: "Anthony Miiller of Danzig saw about 50 years ago in that town, a very in- genious machine, which weaves 4 to 6 pieces at once. 13.) "The employer will be always THE CONCEPT OF RELATIVE SURPLUS-VALUE 321 produces, say 10 times as many commodities as before, and thus spends one-tenth as much labour-time on each, by no means pre- vents him from continuing to work 12 hours as before, nor from pro- ducing in those 12 hours 1,200 articles instead of 120. 4 The independent form, i.e., the money-form, which the value of commodities assumes in the case of simple circulation, serves only one purpose, namely, their exchange, and vanishes in the final result of the movement. informed me that he employed females exclusively at his power-looms . 2 With other things he says naively: "But if our poor" (technical term for labourers) "will live luxuriously . Melt it down again; there's no loss in it, for the coining costs the owner nothing. In 1836 a manufacturer stated: "The labour now undergone in the factories is much greater than it used to be . It is evident that the whole gist of this argument lies in the words "and so on," which send us from pillar to post. 4 Hence, the philosopher of the Factory, Ure, 1 On the condition of so-called domestic industries, specially valuable materials are to be found in the latest reports of the Children's Employment Commission. C'est le mettre dans le vide de richesses, pour ue le laisser vivre qu'a votre volonte." (Colins, I. But as further the mass of surplus-value which a single labourer produces, the value of labour-power being given, is determined by the rate of the surplus-value, this law follows: the mass of the surplus-value produced is equal to the amount of the variable capital advanced, multiplied by the rate of surplus-value; in other words: it is de- termined by the compound ratio between the number of labour- powers exploited simultaneously by the same capitalist and the degree of exploitation of each individual labour-power. 1 (t>.) The Badly Paid Strata of the British Industrial Class During the cotton famine of 1862, Dr. Smith was charged by the Privy Council with an inquiry into the conditions of nourishment of the distressed operatives in Lancashire and Che- shire. Horner in "Reports of Insp. With very ac- curate appreciation of the state of things, the London labourers employed in the building trades declared, during the great strike and lock-out of 1860, 548 CAPITALIST PRODUCTION It is a fact generally known that, the longer the working- days, in any branch of industry, the lower are the wages. I.) In like manner, ex officio, he opens his work with an apotheosis on the divi- sion of labour. of Insp. In this way, all along the line of exchange, hoards of gold and silver of varied extent are accumulated. The number of these workwomen in the United Kingdom in 1861, was 750,334. The increase of some is a consequence, that of the others a condition of the increasing productivity of labour. c, pp. Barbon, 1. Bathed in the fire of labour, appropriated as part and par- cel of labour's organism, and, as it were, made alive for the per- formance of their functions in the process, they are in truth con- sumed, but consumed with a purpose, as elementary constituents of new use-values, of new products, ever ready as means of sub- sistence for individual consumption, or as means of production for some new labour-process. Sometimes under the 12 hours' system they are obliged, on ac- count of the non-appearance of those that ought to relieve them, to work a double turn of 24 hours. Our friend gained 10 as a seller only to lose it again as a buyer. The weight of gold fixed upon as the standard of prices, deviates from the weight that serves as the circulating medium, and the "Zur Kritik, &c," pp. "On n'a pas pu encore engager les Silesiens au partage des communes, tandis que dans la Nouvelle Marche, il n'y a guere de village ou ce partage ne soit execute avec le plus grand succes." (Mirabeau: "De la Monarchic Prussienne." Londres, 1788, t. Simple reproduction is only the periodical repetition of this first operation; each time money is converted afresh into capital. The lengthening of the mule causes some increase of labour, he admits. e., prevents the return to the soil of its elements consumed by man in the form of food and clothing; it therefore violates the condi- tions necessary to lasting fertility of the soil. Hence the writers of the manufacturing period treat the division of labour chiefly as a means of virtually supplying a deficiency of labourers, and not as a means of actually displac- ing those in work. 648.) "What objection do you see to it?" "I think it is degrad- ing to the sex." (n. Every introduction of improved methods, therefore, works almost simultaneously on the new capital and on that al- ready in action. It may be supposed that it describes the horrors of a past age. It is not the capital, but the use of the capital productively, which is the cause of profits." (John Cazenove,l. of Pact., 31st Oct., 1865," p. For when the variation is either in the duration or in the intensity of labour, there is always a cor- responding change in the magnitude of the value created, inde-, pendently of the nature of the article in which that value is embodied. But mean- while the fiasco of the Chartist party whose leaders were imprisoned, and whose organisation was dismembered, had shaken the confidence of the English working-class in its own strength. This two-fold effect, resulting from the two-fold character of labour, may be traced in various phenomena. 